---
doc_id: "beps-a14-best-practices-japan-2021-oecd-en"
title: "BEPS Action 14: peer review best practices - Japan (2021) (OECD PDF)"
publisher: "OECD"
lang: "en"
license: "OECD (see source PDF)"
source_url: "https://www.oecd.org/tax/beps/beps-action-14-peer-review-best-practices-japan-2021.pdf"
page_count: 29
generated_at: "2026-02-01"
---

# Page 1
ctp.beps@oecd.org
For more information:
@OECDtax
Inclusive Framework on BEPS: Action 14 
Making Dispute Resolution More Effective 
MAP Peer Review Report
BEST PRACTICES
Japan
2021
http://oe.cd/bepsaction14

# Page 2
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
Inclusive Framework of BEPS: Action 14 
Making Dispute Resolution More Effective 
MAP Peer Review Report 
 Japan  
Best Practices (2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBE

# Page 3
2  CTPA/CFA/NOE2(2020)42 
 
 
      
This document, as well as any data and map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or 
sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name 
of any territory, city or area. 
 
Please cite this publication as: 
OECD (2021), BEPS Action 14 MAP Peer Review Report Stage 2: Best Practices – Japan (2021), 
OECD/G20 Inclusive Framework on BEPS, OECD, Paris. 
http://www.oecd.org/tax/beps/beps-action-14-peer-review-best-practices-japan-2021.pdf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Photo credits: Cover © Rawpixel.com - Shutterstock.com. 
© OECD 2021 
 
 
OECD freely authorises the use of this material for non-commercial purposes. All requests for commercial 
use should be submitted to rights@oecd.org.

# Page 4
TABLE OF CONTENTS  3 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
Table of contents 
Abbreviations and Acronyms ................................................................................................................. 5 
Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 7 
Part A  Preventing Disputes .................................................................................................................. 9 
[BP.1] Implement bilateral APA programmes ................................................................................ 9 
[BP.2] Publish mutual agreements of a general nature ................................................................. 11 
[BP.3] Provide guidance on APAs ..................................................................................................... 11 
[BP.4] Develop “global awareness” of the audit/examination functions ........................................... 13 
Part B  Availability and access to MAP ............................................................................................. 15 
[BP.5] Implement appropriate administrative measures to facilitate recourse to MAP ..................... 15 
[BP.6] Provide access to MAP for bona fide taxpayer-initiated foreign adjustments ....................... 16 
[BP.7] Provide guidance on multilateral MAPs ................................................................................. 16 
[BP.8] Provide for suspension of collection procedures for pending MAP cases ............................. 17 
Part C  Resolution of MAP Cases ....................................................................................................... 19 
[BP.9] Permit taxpayers to request multi-year resolution of recurring issues through the MAP....... 19 
[BP.10] Publish explanation of the relationship between the MAP and domestic remedies ............. 19 
[BP.11] Provide guidance on consideration of interest and penalties in MAP .................................. 20 
[BP.12] Include Article 9(2) of the OECD Model Tax Convention in tax treaties............................ 21 
Part D  Implementation of MAP agreements .................................................................................... 23 
Glossary ................................................................................................................................................ 27

# Page 5


# Page 6
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS  5 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
APA Advance Pricing Arrangement 
BEPS Baser Erosion and Profit Shifting 
FTA Forum on Tax Administration 
MAP Mutual Agreement Procedure 
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

# Page 7


# Page 8
INTRODUCTION  7 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
Introduction 
The final report on BEPS Action 14: “Making Dispute Resolution Mechanisms More 
Effective” identified a number of best practices related to the three general objectives of the 
Action 14 Minimum Standard.  
Paragraph 9 of the Terms of Reference to monitor and review the implement ation of the 
BEPS Action 14 Minimum Standard to make dispute resolution mechanisms more effective1 
stipulates that: 
The best practices are not part of the minimum standard and whether or not  a 
jurisdiction has implemented the best practices will not be peer reviewed or 
monitored, nor will it affect the assessment of the assessed jurisdiction. Jurisdictions 
are free, however, to identify best practices they have adopted. 
Japan has provided information and requested feedback by peers on how it has adopted best 
practices. In that regard, the FTA MAP Forum agreed on an optional best practices feedback 
form that peers have used to provide feedback on Japan’s adoption of the best practices.  
The peer review process on the implementation of the Action 14 Minimum Standard consists 
of two stages: a peer review process (stage 1) and a peer monitoring process (stage 2). Stage 
2 is launched within one year upon the adoption of the peer review report  by the BEPS 
Inclusive Framework through an update report by Japan. This document contains a general 
overview of the adoption of best practices and comments by peers on the adoption of these 
best practices during stage 1 (period ranging from 1 January 2015 up to 31 December 2017) 
and stage 2 (ranging from 1 January 2018 up to 31 August 2019).
                                                      
1  Terms of reference to monitor and review the implementing of the BEPS Action 14 Minimum Standard to make dispute resolution 
mechanisms more effective (CTPA/CFA/NOE2(2016)45/REV1).

# Page 9


# Page 10
PART A: PREVENTING DISPUTES  9 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
Part A 
 
Preventing Disputes 
[BP.1] Implement bilateral APA programmes 
Jurisdictions should implement bilateral APA programmes. 
1. APAs concluded bilaterally between competent authorities provide an increased level 
of certainty in both jurisdictions, lessen the likelihood of double taxation and may proactively 
prevent transfer pricing disputes.    
2. Japan reported that it has implemented an APA programme, which it has run since 
1987 and which allows unilateral, bilateral and multilateral APAs. These types of APAs can 
be applied both for determining the arm’s length price of transactions between associated 
enterprises and for the attribution of profits to permanent establishments. As will be discussed 
in more detail under element BP.3, Japan has included in chapter 6 of the Commissioner’s 
Directive on the operation of transfer pricing (‘ Transfer Pricing Directive ’) detailed 
information on its APA programme. 
3. Further to the above, Japan noted that in addition to its APA programme, the Regional 
Taxation Bureaus  of the National Tax Agency  have since June 2017 started accepting  
enquiries from taxpayers in relation to transfer pricing documentation. This programme has 
specifically been introduced to ensure and enhance taxpayers’ voluntary tax compliance, also 
with a view to further prevent disputes.  
4. Where it concerns unilateral APAs, the competence to handle APA requests is 
assigned to the National Tax Agency, and sub -mandated to the R egional Commissioner 
Large Enterprise Examination Division of the Regional Taxation Bureau, or t o the District 
Director of the Examination Group (Corporation) of the Tax Office, such dependent on which 
department has jurisdiction over the taxpayer submitti ng the APA request. 2 Contact details 
for each department are made available online in Japanese and can be found at: 
https://www.nta.go.jp/taxes/shiraberu/sodan/kobetsu/itenkakakuzeisei/03.htm 
https://www.nta.go.jp/about/organization/index.htm 
5. Where an APA request concerns a bilateral or multilateral APA, it is the Regional 
Tax Bureau’s Large Enterprise Examination Division that will conduct the initial review of 
the APA request. However, where such a request is made under the MAP provision of a tax 
treaty, it is MAP office that will – in co-operation with the Regional Tax Bureau – further 
                                                      
2  See chapter 6, section 2 of the Transfer Pricing Directive.

# Page 11
10  PART A: PREVENTING DISPUTES 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
handle the request and conduct negotiations with the treaty partner. 3 In this respect, Japan 
noted that next to the request for a bilateral or multilateral APA, taxpayers are also required 
to submit a MAP request on the basis of the MAP guidance (see element B.8  of the peer 
review report for a discussion). 
6. In relation to the filing of an APA request, Japan reported it encourages taxpayers to 
have a pre -filing consultation with the competent department, such with a view to have a 
common understanding of the request, to assist taxpayers in submitting the required 
documentation efficiently and to expedite the APA process.4 Japan further reported that there 
are no specific timelines for filing of APA requests and that no fees are charged to taxpayers. 
However, an APA request needs to be filed on or before the commencing date of the first 
taxable year for which the request is made. Where an APA request relates to fisca l years 
2021-2024, the request thus has to be submitted on or before 1 January 2021. Typically, Japan 
applies APAs for a period of three to five years.5  
7. In view of the above, Japan annually publishes statistics relating to APAs on the 
website of the National Tax Agency since 2006. These statistics can be found at (in English):6 
https://www.nta.go.jp/english/map_report/index.htm 
8. These statistics inter alia relate to the number of APA requests received, the number 
of cases closed and the inventory of pending APA cases as per year-end. For calendar years 
2014-2019 Japan reported the following statistics:7 
Year Number bilateral 
APA requests 
Number of APAs 
granted 
Inventory per year-
end 
2014 157 147 302 
2015 161 106 357 
2016 122 116 363 
2017 157 152 368 
2018 163 134 397 
2019 110 115 392 
9. Three peers provided input on this best practice. The first peer reported that Japan 
has a well -developed bilateral APA programme. The second peer noted that it appreciates 
Japan’s long-standing commitment to APAs, as being the most direct and viable means  for 
preventing MAP cases and also to provide taxpayers with certainty. In this peer’s view the 
commitment to concluded APAs with a meaningful level of prospectively is a best practice 
that underlies the valuable promise of APAs to provide taxpayers with certainty on a going-
forward basis. In that regard, the peer respectfully welcomed additional discussions with 
Japan’s competent authority in a co-operative and collaborative manner. Lastly, the third peer 
echoed the previous input and noted it has a very positive relationship with Japan’s competent 
authority, whereby contacts are considered easy and frequent, as also that Japan’s competent 
authority provides quick responses. Such contacts take place in various manners such as e -
mail, letters and face-to-face meetings, whereby meetings are scheduled once or twice a year. 
                                                      
3  See chapter 6, section 12/13 of the Transfer Pricing Directive. 
4  See chapter 6, section 10 of the Transfer Pricing Directive. 
5  See chapter 6, section 7 of the Transfer Pricing Directive. 
6  Statistics on APAs are also available in the annual report of the National Tax Agency. For 2018, these statistics are available in 
Part III-3(4). Available at: http://www.nta.go.jp/english/Report_pdf/2018e_06.pdf. 
7  The numbers reported in the table deviate slightly from the numbers included in the annual report issued by Japan’s National Tax Agency 
due to the fact that in the latter the basis is the fiscal year, which in Japan runs from 1 July to 30 June.  Further, the numbers reported for 
the year involves the period until 31 August 2019.

# Page 12
PART A: PREVENTING DISPUTES  11 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
This peer further mentioned that in all pending MAP cases with Japan progress is made in a 
reasonable time. 
[BP.2] Publish mutual agreements of a general nature   
Jurisdictions should have appropriate procedures in place to publish agreements reached by 
competent authorities on difficulties or doubts arising as to the interpretation or application 
of their tax treaties in appropriate cases. 
10. Agreements reached by competent authorities to resolve difficulties or doubts arising 
as to the interpretation or application of their tax treaties in relation to issues of a general 
nature which concern, or may concern, a category of taxpayers reflect the competent 
authorities’ mutual understanding of the m eaning of the convention and its terms. As such 
agreements provide information that might be useful to prevent difficulties or doubts in the 
interpretation or application of tax treaty provisions, publication of these agreements is 
valuable.  
11. Japan reported that it publishes agreements reached on difficulties or doubts arising 
as to the interpretation or application of their tax treaties by the competent authorities. These 
publications can be found on the website of Japan’s Ministry of Finance (in English) or of 
the National Tax Agency (in Japanese) and are available at:  
https://www.mof.go.jp/english/tax_policy/tax_conventions/press_release/index.htm 
https://www.nta.go.jp/taxes/shiraberu/kokusai/sonota/index.htm 
12. In relation to the above, and as an example, Japan published mutual agreements 
reached with Portugal (2013) and the United States (2005).8   
13. Peers did not provide input relating to this particular best practice.  
1.1. [BP.3] Provide guidance on APAs 
Jurisdictions’ published MAP guidance should provide guidance on APAs. 
14. Guidance on a jurisdiction’s APA programme facilitates t he use of that programme 
and creates awareness for taxpayers on how the APA process functions. As APAs may also 
prevent future disputes from arising, including information on APAs in a jurisdiction’s MAP 
guidance is relevant. 
15. As previously mentioned under element BP.1, Japan has implemented an APA 
programme and has issued specific guidance in relation to this programme in the form of the 
Transfer Pricing Directive. This guidance in relation to APA procedure was lastly updated 
on 16 February 2018 and is available online and can be found at (in English): 
http://www.nta.go.jp/english/07.pdf 
16. This guidance includes information on: Japan’s policy in respect of APAs, when and 
by whom an APA can be requested,  the governmental department competent to handle APA 
                                                      
8  The agreement with Portugal is published in English and is available at: 
http://www.mof.go.jp/english/tax_policy/tax_conventions/press_release/20131206pt.htm.

# Page 13
12  PART A: PREVENTING DISPUTES 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
requests, the list of information that taxpayers have to submit alongside the APA request, the 
period covered by an APA, how the process for obtaining an APA will be conducted, 
organisation of a pre-filing meeting, the relationship with the mutual agreement procedure, 
the implementation of an APA and the effect thereof, the submission of an annual APA report 
by taxpayers, the possibility to amend, renew or cancel an APA, and the possibility of 
applying APAs to previous fiscal years (roll-back).  
17. For corporations for which the consolidated taxation system applies, Japan has issued 
specific APA guidance in the Commissioner’s Directive on the operation of transfer pricing 
for consolidated corporations ( in relation  to APA procedure , lastly updated in February  
2018).9 This guidance is available online and can be found at (in Japanese): 
http://www.nta.go.jp/law/jimu-unei/hojin/050428/05.htm 
18.  Furthermore, Japan also provides guidance on APAs in relation to the attribution of 
profits to permanent establishments in the following documents: 
 For domestic and foreign corporations : chapters 6 and 7 of the Commissioner’s 
Directive on the operation of auditing, etc. for income attributable to permanent 
establishments (in relation to APA procedure, lastly updated in February 2018). The 
information is available at (in Japanese): 
http://www.nta.go.jp/law/jimu-unei/hojin/160630/06.htm 
http://www.nta.go.jp/law/jimu-unei/hojin/160630/07.htm; 
  For domestic consolidated corporations 10 : chapter 5 of the Commissioner’s 
Directive on the operation of auditing, etc. for consolidated income attributable to 
consolidated corporation’s permanent establishments located overseas (in relation to 
APA procedure, lastly updated  in February 2018). The information is available at (in 
Japanese): 
http://www.nta.go.jp/law/jimu-unei/hojin/160630_2/05.htm; 
 For (resident and non-resident) individuals11: chapters 5 and 6 of the Commission’s 
Directive on the operation of a uditing, etc. for various income attributable to 
individual’s permanent establishments (issued on 31 March 2017). The information 
is available at (in Japanese): 
http://www.nta.go.jp/law/jimu-unei/shotoku/shinkoku/170331/05.htm 
http://www.nta.go.jp/law/jimu-unei/shotoku/shinkoku/170331/06.htm 
19.  While the documents mentioned in paragraphs 17 and 18 are issued for specific 
subjects, Japan reported that the content of the APA guidance included in these documents 
does not substantially deviate from the general APA guidance discussed in paragraphs 15 
and 16 above, but are separately issued to provide clarity for each category of taxpayers. 
20. In addition to the above, Japan has also included information on its APA programme, 
particularly on bilateral and multilateral APAs in several sections of the Commissioner’s 
Directive on the mutual agreement procedure (“MAP guidance”) – (e.g. sections 6(2), 13(3), 
                                                      
9  As defined in item 12-7-2 of Article 2 of the Corporations Tax Act 
10  As defined in item 3 of Article 2 of the Corporations Tax Act.  
11  As defined in items 3 and 5 of Article 2(1) of the Income Tax Act.

# Page 14
PART A: PREVENTING DISPUTES  13 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
24 and 25) and the Guidance for taxpayers on the mutual agreement procedure Q&A (“Q&A 
on MAP”). These are available at (in English):  
http://www.nta.go.jp/english/00.pdf 
http://www.nta.go.jp/english/03.pdf 
21. Japan reported that it has carried out an update to its Transfer Pricing Directive in 
February 2018 in respect of (i) the procedure applicable where taxpay ers are required to 
submit additional information and (ii) the procedure applicable where the APA process is 
deferred or closed in exceptional cases. Accordingly, corresponding updates were also made 
to the Commissioner’s Directives mentioned above in respect of specific taxpayers. 
22. Peers did not provide input relating to this particular best practice. 
[BP.4] Develop “global awareness” of the audit/examination functions 
Jurisdictions should develop the “global awareness” of the audit/examination functions 
involved in international matters through the delivery of the Forum on Tax Administration’s 
“Global Awareness Training Module” to appropriate personnel. 
23. Making audit/examination function of tax administrations that are involved in 
international matters aware of: (i) the potential for creating double taxation, (ii) the impact of 
a proposed adjustment on the tax base of one or more jurisdictions and (iii) the process and 
principles by which competing juridical claims are reconciled by competent authorities, may 
be useful to prevent disputes from arising. Using the Global Awareness Training Module 
developed by the Forum on Tax Administration (FTA) can be helpful in this respect. 
24. Japan reported that the National Tax Agency provides training to officials in 
audit/examination functions through its National Tax College. This college provides trainings 
to learn these officials about relevant tax laws and auditing skills. In relation to dispute 
resolution, two training programmes are relevant: 
 International Training Course: a four month course that aims at providing officials 
basic knowledge and advance expertise concerning examinations of international 
transactions and other practical work concerning international taxation. 12 In more 
detail, the curriculum of the course consist of teaching : (i) international tax laws 
(including tax treaties), (ii) examination methods for international transactions and 
(iii) rules and practices concerning international trade; and 
 Corresponding training courses : part of these courses concerns International 
Taxation I and II, which aim at providing officials with knowledge and skills in the 
field of international taxation.13 The training consists of assignments as a preparation 
to the course and several days of lecture.  
25. Further to the a bove, Japan reported that each division of the Regional Taxation 
Bureaus organises one day or short-term training sessions for auditors. An example hereof is 
the transfer pricing division, which gives trainings to all auditors in that division to update 
their knowledge in light of recent modifications of the OECD Transfer Pricing Guidelines, 
                                                      
12  See for information in English: http://www.nta.go.jp/about/organization/ntc/english/education/08_international.htm.  
13  See for information in English:  http://www.nta.go.jp/about/organization/ntc/english/education/11_courses.htm..

# Page 15
14  PART A: PREVENTING DISPUTES 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
domestic laws and directives. In addition, Japan noted that t he essence of the Global 
Awareness Training Module is shared among auditors through those trainings.  
26. One peer provided input on this best practice and mentioned that Japan has been a 
committed partner within the FTA MAP Forum as also in the FTA’s Large Business 
Programme with a view to raise awareness of the principles of the Global Awareness Training 
Module at the level of its examination function and at the competent authority level. To this 
the peer added that it also appreciates the willingness of Japan’s competent authority to 
discuss the use of “reference sets” of comparable companies in cases presenting common fact 
patterns and transfer pricing issues. In this peer’s view such reference sets provide for a useful 
tool for the efficient and consistent resolution of MAP/APA cases with Japan’s competent 
authority. In that regard it appreciates the opportunity to discuss these reference sets and other 
ideas with Japan with a view to improve current practices concerning the resolution of cases.

# Page 16
PART B: AVAILABILITY AND ACCESS TO MAP  15 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
 Part B 
 
Availability and access to MAP 
[BP.5] Implement appropriate administrative measures to facilitate recourse to MAP 
Jurisdictions should implement appropriate administrative measures to facilitate recourse to 
the MAP to resolve treaty-related disputes, recognising the general principle that the choice 
of remedies should remain with the taxpayer.  
27. Under Article 25(1) of the OECD Model Tax Convention, the mutual agreement 
procedure is a dispute settlement procedure in annex to domestic available remedies and not 
a substitute for such remedies. Reference is made to inter alia paragraph 7 of the Commentary 
to Article 25 of the OECD Model Tax Convention, which specifies that the right to submit a 
MAP request is available to taxpayers without depriving them of the ordinary legal remedies 
available. Facilitating recourse to the MAP through appropriate administrative measures, 
under the general principle that the choice of remedies remains with taxpayers, enables them 
to effectively resort to such dispute settlement procedure.    
28. Where a taxpayer does not agree with an action take n by the competent department 
of the National Tax Agency, it can submit within three months as from the date of that action 
request for a re -examination with the Regional Commissioner of the Regional Taxation 
Bureau, or the District Director of the Tax Off ice, such dependent on which of the 
departments holds competence over the particular taxpayer. Alternatively and also within 
three months, the taxpayer can request for a reconsideration of the action at the level of the 
National Tax Tribunal. In both insta nces, a decision should be taken within three months. 
Where re -examination decision is dissatisfactory to the taxpayer, the latter can ask for a 
review by the National Tax Tribunal within one month after the ruling. After having run 
through these administrative procedures, taxpayers are allowed to lodge an appeal at Japan’s 
domestic courts within a period of six months.  
29. In view of the above, Japan reported that taxpayers are for a particular dispute allowed 
to request MAP assistance and at the same time seek to resolve the dispute via domestically 
available judicial and administrative remedies. This is also in the situation where the specific 
case under review has already been decided via these remedies, but in that situation, Japan’s 
competent authority wi ll abide by that decision in its MAP discussions with the other 
competent authority concerned. Furthermore, n o fees are charged to taxpayers when 
submitting a MAP request, or when requesting for a pre -filing meeting before submitting a 
MAP request. 
30. Article 12 of Japan’s Ministerial Ordinance on the Enforcement of the Act on Special 
Provisions of the Income Tax Act, the Corporation Tax Act and the Local Tax Act regarding 
the application of tax treaties defines the legal basis upon which taxpayers can submit a MAP

# Page 17
16  PART B: AVAILABILITY AND ACCESS TO MAP 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
request. This article does not contain any limitation on the scope of application of MAP, thus 
also not in relation to the interaction with domestic remedies.  
31. Peers did not provide input relating to this particular best practice. 
[BP.6] Provide access to MAP for bona fide taxpayer-initiated foreign adjustments  
Jurisdictions’ published MAP guidance should provide that taxpayers will be allowed access 
to the MAP so that the competent authorities may resolve through consultation the double 
taxation that can arise in the case of bona fide taxpayer-initiated foreign adjustments. 
32. A taxpayer-initiated foreign adjustment is considered bona fide where it reflects the 
good faith effort of the taxpayer to report correctly, timely and properly the adjusted taxable 
income from a controlled transaction or the profits attributable to a permanent establishment 
with a view to reflect an arm’s length result, and where the taxpayer has otherwise timely 
and properly fulfilled all of its obligations related to such taxable income or profits under the 
laws of the treaty partners. As such taxpayer-initiated foreign adjustments may lead to cases 
of double taxation, it is relevant that there is access to MAP for resolving these cases. 
Furthermore, specifying whether there is access to the MAP for these adjustments in a 
jurisdiction’s MAP guidance also provides additional clarity.  
33. Japan reported that generally it allows taxpayers to request MAP in case of bona fide 
taxpayer-initiated foreign adjustments . Whether for an indi vidual case access to MAP is 
granted, however, depends on the facts and circumstances of the individual case. 
34. Article 12 of Japan’s Ministerial Ordinance on the Enforcement of the Act on Special 
Provisions of the Income Tax Act, the Corporation Tax Act and the Local Tax Act regarding 
the application of tax treaties defines the legal basis upon which taxpayers can submit a MAP 
request. This article does not contain any limitation on the scope of application of MAP, thus 
also not in relation to cases concerni ng bona fide taxpayer -initiated foreign adjustments . 
Japan’s MAP guidance, in note 2 attached to section 3(1)(a), confirms that access to MAP 
may be granted in such cases, where eligible. Further, the response to question 2.10 of Japan’s 
Q&A on MAP include s examples for which cases taxpayers can submit a MAP request, 
which also includes such cases.14  
35. Peers did not provide input relating to this particular best practice. 
[BP.7] Provide guidance on multilateral MAPs 
Jurisdictions’ published MAP guidance should provide guidance on multilateral MAPs.  
36. In recent years, globalisation has created unique challenges for existing tax treaty 
dispute resolution mechanisms. Whilst the mutual agreement procedure provided for in 
Article 25 of the OECD Model Tax Convention has traditionally focused on the resolutio n 
of bilateral disputes, phenomena such as the adoption of regional and global value chains as 
well as the accelerated integration of national economies and markets have emphasised the 
need for effective mechanisms to resolve multi -jurisdictional tax disputes. In that regard, it 
                                                      
14  Available in English at: http://www.nta.go.jp/english/03.pdf.

# Page 18
PART B: AVAILABILITY AND ACCESS TO MAP  17 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
is for clarity purposes relevant that jurisdiction’s MAP guidance includes information on 
availability of and access to multilateral MAPs.  
37.  Japan’s MAP guidance, in note 1 attached to Section 3(1)(a), states that domestic 
corporations may initiate multilateral MAP discussions by filing separate requests with 
regard to each of the treaties involved based on the location of the associated enterprises . 
Further, the response to question 2.10 of Japan’s Q&A on MAP  specifies that MAP is 
available in such cases.  
38. Peers did not provide input relating to this particular best practice. 
[BP.8] Provide for suspension of collection procedures for pending MAP cases 
Jurisdictions should take appropriate measures to provide for a suspension of colle ctions 
procedures during the period a MAP case is pending. Such a suspension of collections should 
be available, at a minimum, under the same conditions as apply to a person pursuing a 
domestic administrative or judicial remedy.  
39. If, following an adjustment taxpayers immediately have to pay the tax due, whereas 
the same amount was already paid to the tax administration of the other jurisdiction involved, 
double taxation will in fact occur. As taxpayers may then face significant cash -flow issues, 
at least for the period the MAP case is pending, it is relevant that jurisdictions provide for 
suspension of collection procedure for this period under at least the same conditions as 
available for domestic remedies. 
40. Japan reported that taxpayers can ask for  the suspension of tax collection for the 
period a MAP case is pending and insofar it concerns a case concerning the allocation of 
profits between associated enterprises. The relevant rules in relation her eto are included in 
Article 66-4-2 of the Act on Sp ecial Measures Concerning Taxation, which stipulates that 
where a taxpayer has submitted a MAP request to either Japan’s competent authority or the 
competent authority of its treaty partner, the National Tax Agency may – upon request by the 
taxpayer – grant a suspension of tax collection for the tax due for which a MAP request is 
submitted.15 The period for which such suspension is granted ranges from the date on which 
the taxation in question  becomes due and payable (or on the date where a request for 
suspension is submitted if this is later) and ends one month after the date on which the MAP 
agreement is implemented in Japan. Where no MAP agreement is entered into, the suspension 
is granted until one month from the date the Commissioner’s notification to the taxpayer of 
the fact that the MAP case is closed. Furthermore, under the domestic rules the suspension 
of tax collection may be cancelled when the taxpayer: (i) has withdrawn its MAP request, (ii) 
does not co -operate in providing documents necessary for MAP discussions, (iii) is found 
unable to pay the tax due, (iv) does not issue a security deposit, (v) has any new delinquent 
national tax due other  than taxes  related to the suspension of tax collection, or (iv) is found 
inappropriate to be granted a suspension of tax collection.  
41. Furthermore, section 43 of Japan’s MAP guidance includes detailed information on 
the possibility for taxpayers to obtain a suspension of tax collection for the period a MAP is 
pending, the conditions under which the request for such a suspension are granted, what steps 
taxpayers need to take when filing a request hereto and the process for granting the requested 
                                                      
15  The relevant rules to calculate the tax due are included in Article 39 -12-2(1) and 39-112-2(1) of the Order for Enforcement 
of the Act on Special Measures concerning taxation.

# Page 19
18  PART B: AVAILABILITY AND ACCESS TO MAP 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
suspension.16 In this respect, section 43 specifies the following requirements  to be fulfilled 
before a suspension of tax collection will be granted: 
 The taxpayer is subject to taxation in Japan as listed in the specific provisions; 
 The taxpayer has submitted a MAP request; 
 The amount of tax due is the subject of the consideration with a treaty partner in 
MAP; 
 The taxpayer does not have any delinquent national taxes other than taxes related to 
the suspension of tax collection; and 
 The taxpayer deposited a security equivalent to the amount for which a suspension of 
tax collection is requested.  
42. Further, a summary of the above provisions, in easy-to-read language, has been added 
to Japan’s Q&A on MAP in Q 4-1 to Q 4-10 under the title ‘Grace of tax payment related to 
transfer pricing taxation’. 
43. Peers did not provide input relating to this particular best practice. 
                                                      
16  Available in English at: http://www.nta.go.jp/english/03.pdf.

# Page 20
PART C: RESOLUTION OF MAP CASES  19 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
 Part C 
 
Resolution of MAP Cases  
[BP.9] Permit taxpayers to request multi-year resolution of recurring issues through 
the MAP 
Jurisdictions should implement appropriate procedures to permit, in certain cases and after 
an initial tax assessment, requests made by taxpayer which are within the time period 
provided for in the tax treaty for the multi -year resolution through the MAP of recurring 
issues with respect to filed tax years, where the relevant facts and circumstances are the same 
and subject to the verification of such facts and circumstances on audit.  
 
44. In certain cases, a MAP request with respect to a specific adjustment to income may 
present recurring issues that may be relevant in previous or subsequent tax years. Allowing 
taxpayers to submit requests for the multi-year resolution through MAP with respect to such 
recurring issues, where the relevant facts and circumstances are the same, may help avoid 
duplicative MAP requests and facilitate a more efficient use of competent authority 
resources.  
45. Japan reported it allows taxpayers to request the  multi-year resolution of recurring 
issues through the MAP  where the facts and circumstances of the case remained the same 
and insofar the case concerns the application of the arm’s length principle for profit allocation 
between associated enterprises and the attri bution of profits to permanent establishments. 
Japan specified that a MAP agreement concerning an initial tax assessment can be prolonged 
to subsequent fiscal years via a bilateral APA. To this end, taxpayers need to submit a MAP 
request for the initial tax assessment alongside an APA request (including a roll-back request) 
for the current and subsequent fiscal years.  
46. Japan’s MAP guidance, in note 1 attached to Section 3( 2), states that for the multi -
year resolution of cases, the taxpayer must file a MAP r equest for the present year and an 
APA request for future years. 
47. Peers did not provide input relating to this particular best practice. 
[BP.10] Publish explanation of the relationship between the MAP and domestic 
remedies 
Jurisdictions should publish an ex planation of the relationship between the MAP and 
domestic law administrative and judicial remedies.

# Page 21
20  PART C: RESOLUTION OF MAP CASES 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
48. As mentioned under BP.5, pursuant to Article 25(1) of the OECD Model Tax 
Convention taxpayers are allowed to submit a MAP request irrespective of available domestic 
remedies. This, however, does not further specify how to proceed if both available remedies 
are initiated and the case is dealt with in the bilateral phase of the MAP. Publicly available 
guidance on the relationship between the MAP and domestic r emedies provides clarity to 
taxpayers as well as treaty partners. 
49. Japan included information on the relationship between MAP and domestic law 
administrative and judicial remedies in the note attached to section 3(1) of its MAP guidance. 
This note clearly stipulates that taxpayers are allowed to submit a MAP request under a tax 
treaty, such regardless of the fact whether the taxpayer  (or its foreign affiliated person)  has 
initiated administrative or judicial remedies in respect of the taxes that are subject of the MAP 
request. The same information is included in the response to question 2.11 of the Q&A on 
MAP. This response further specifies that where the court in Japan has already decided on a 
case, its competent authority will follow that decision in its MAP negotiations with the other 
competent authority concerned. The response to question 2.8 of this Q&A further specifies 
that no fees are charged to taxpayers when submitting a MAP request. Furthermore, section 
5(1) of the MAP guidance notes that taxpayers  can ask for a pre -filing meeting before 
submitting a MAP request. The response to question 2.3 of the Q&A on MAP also includes 
information hereon.  
50. One peer provided input on this best practice. It noted that in its experience Japan’s 
competent authority has continuously made robust efforts to facilitate the opportunity for 
taxpayers to make use of MAP to avoid, or otherwise reduce, instances of double taxation. 
However, the peer also shared the view that in its belief taxpayers and competent authorities 
would benefit from enhanced efforts by Japan’s competent authority to provide guidance to 
taxpayers concerning those situations where, in its view, the application of Japan’s domestic 
law forestalls reliance on MAP to eliminate cases of double taxation. To this the peer added 
that it respectfully welcomes additional discussions with Japan’s competent authority on the 
scope within which such situations should occur and on the best practices for addressing them 
in a collaborative and co-operative manner. 
[BP.11] Provide guidance on consideration of interest and penalties in MAP 
Jurisdictions’ published MAP guidance should provide guidance on the consideration of 
interest and penalties in the mutual agreement procedure.  
51. As interests and penalties may concern su bstantial amounts, providing clarity in a 
jurisdiction’s MAP guidance on whether interest and penalties are in the scope of the MAP 
is relevant to ensure that a taxpayer is well-informed on this issue.  
52. Japan reported it does not take interest and/or penalties into consideration in MAP. 
However, where a MAP agreement requires an adjustment to be made in Japan, leading to a 
reduction of the taxable income, then Japan will reduce interest and/or penalties in proportion 
to such an adjustment on the moment of implementing the MAP agreement. Japan’s position 
on the consideration of interest and penalties in MAP , that the competent authority would 
explain to the taxpayer the application of interests and penalties to the MAP agreement,  is 
discussed in the note attached to Section 16(1) of the MAP guidance. 
53. Peers did not provide input relating to this particular best practice.

# Page 22
PART C: RESOLUTION OF MAP CASES  21 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
[BP.12] Include Article 9(2) of the OECD Model Tax Convention in tax treaties 
Jurisdictions should include paragraph 2 of Article 9 of the OECD Model Tax Convention in 
their tax treaties.  
54. Article 9(2) of the OECD Model Tax Convention  (OECD, 2017) allows competent 
authorities to make a corresponding adjustment to unilaterally eliminate double ta xation 
arising from primary adjustments. Including this provision in tax treaties provides taxpayers 
the possibility to obtain the elimination of such double taxation via a unilateral corresponding 
adjustment. 
55. Japan reported that it is in favour of including Article 9(2) of the OECD Model Tax 
Convention (OECD, 2017) in its tax treaties where possible and that it will seek to include 
this provision in all of its future tax treaties.  
Overview of tax treaties 
56. Out of Japan’s 71 tax treaties, 19 contain a provision equivalent to Article 9(2) of the 
OECD Model Tax Convention  (OECD, 2017) requiring their state to make a correlative 
adjustment in case a transfer pricing adjustment is imposed by the treaty partner.  17 
Furthermore, 20 tax treaties do not contain a provision that is based on or equivalent to Article 
9(2) of the OECD Model Tax Convention (OECD, 2017), six of which does not contain in 
its entirety a provision that is based on Article 9 of the OECD Model Tax Convention (OECD, 
2017) with regard to associated enterprises.18 The remaining 32 treaties do contain a provision 
that is based on Article 9(2) of the OECD Model Tax Convention (OECD, 2017), but deviate 
from this provision for the following reasons:  
 In 31 corresponding adjustments can only be made through a consultation between 
the competent authorities; and 
 In one treaty granting of a corresponding adjustment is optional, as the phrase “(…) 
shall make an appropriate adjustment” is replaced by “(….) may, where appropriate, 
make an appropriate adjustment”.  
Recent developments  
Bilateral modifications 
57. Japan signed a new tax treaty with a treaty partner that concerns the replacement of 
an existing treaty currently in force. This newly signed treaty has n ot yet entered into force, 
but Japan has already ratified it. This treaty contains a provision that is equivalent to Article 
9(2) of the OECD Model Tax Convention (OECD, 2017) , which was not the case for the 
existing treaty currently in force. Further, Japan signed new tax treaties with six treaty 
partners which are newly negotiated treaties with treaty partners with which there were no 
                                                      
17 These 19 treaties include the newly negotiated treaty with Spain which will replace the currently existing treaty with this 
jurisdiction of 1974 and the newly negotiated treaty with Uzbekistan, for which Japan currently continues to apply the  treaty 
with the former USSR of 1986 and that it will no longer do so upon entry into force of this new treaty. 
18 These 20 treaties include the treaty with former Czechoslovakia that Japan continues to apply to the Czech Republic and the 
Slovak Republic and these six treaties include the treaty with the former USSR that Japan continues to apply to Armenia, 
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Ukraine.

# Page 23
22  PART C: RESOLUTION OF MAP CASES 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
treaties yet in place.19 Three of these six treaties have already entered into force. All of these 
treaties contain  a provision that is equivalent to Article 9(2) of the OECD Model Tax 
Convention (OECD, 2017). The effects of these newly signed treaties have been reflected in 
the analysis above where it has relevance. 
Multilateral Instrument 
58. Japan signed the Multilateral Instrument  and has deposited its instrument of 
ratification on 26 September 2018. The Multilateral Instrument has entered into force for 
Japan on 1 January 2019.  
59. Article 17(2) of t hat instrument stipulates that Article 17(1) – containing the 
equivalent of Article 9(2) of the OECD Model Tax Convention (OECD, 2017) – will apply 
in place of or in the absence of a provision in tax treaties that is equivalent to Article 9(2) of 
the OECD Model Tax Convention (OECD, 2017) . However, this shall only apply if both 
contracting parties to the applicable tax treaty have listed this treaty as a covered tax 
agreement under the Multilateral Instrument. Article 17(2) of the Multilateral Instrument 
does not take effect for a tax treaty if one or both of the treaty partners have, pursuant to 
Article 17(3), reserved the right not to apply Article 17(1) for those tax treaties that already 
contain the equivalent of Article 9(2) of the OECD Model Tax Convention (OECD, 2017), 
or not to apply Article 17(1) in the absence of such equivalent under the condition that: (i) it 
shall make appropriate corresponding adjustments or (ii) its competent authority shall 
endeavour to resolve the case under mutual agreement procedure of the applicable tax treaty. 
Where neither treaty partner has made such a reservation, Article 17(4) of the Multilateral 
Instrument stipulates that both have to notify the depositary  whether the applicable treaty 
already contains a provision equivalent to Article 9(2) of the OECD Model Tax Convention 
(OECD, 2017) . Where such a notification is made by both of them, the Multilateral 
Instrument will modify this treaty to replace that provision. If neither or only one treaty 
partner made this notification, Article 17(1) of the Multilateral Instrument will supersede this 
treaty only to the extent that the provision contained in that treaty relating to the granting of 
corresponding adjustments is incompatible with Article 17(1) (containing the equivalent of 
Article 9(2) of the OECD Model Tax Convention (OECD, 2017)). 
60. Japan has not reserved, pursuant to Article 17(3), the right not to apply Article 17(1) 
of the Multilateral Instrument for those tax treaties that already contain a provision equivalent 
to Article 9(2) of the OECD Model Tax Convention (OECD, 2017) . With regard to the 46 
tax treaties identified in paragraph 56 above (disregarding th ose six treaties that do not 
contain Article 9 at all ) that are considered not to contain this equivalent, Japan listed 36 
treaties as a covered tax agreement under the Multilateral Instrument, but only for 25 of them 
made a notification on the basis of Article 17(4) that they do contain a provision described in 
Article 17(2).20  
61. Of the relevant treaty 25 partners, all are signatories to the Multilateral Instrument 
and have listed their treaty with Japan as a covered tax agreement under that instrument, but 
11 have, on the basis of Article 17(3), reserved the right not to apply Article 17( 1) as they 
considered that their treaty with Japan already contains the equivalent of Article 9(2). 12 of 
the 14 remaining treaty partners also made a notification on the basis of Ar ticle 17(4). Of 
                                                      
19 One of these treaties is with a treaty partner, for which Japan currently continues to apply the 1986 treaty with the former 
USSR, but which will no longer do so upon entry into force of this new treaty. 
20 These 36 treaties include the treaty with former Czechoslovakia that Japan continues to apply to the Czech Republic and the 
Slovak Republic.

# Page 24
PART C: RESOLUTION OF MAP CASES  23 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
these 12 treaty partners, nine have  already deposited their instrument of ratification of the 
Multilateral Instrument, following which the Multilateral Instrument has entered into force 
for the treaties between Japan and these treaty partne rs, and therefore has replaced the 
relevant treaty provision to include the equivalent of Article 9(2) of the OECD Model Tax 
Convention (OECD, 2017). For the remaining three treaties, the Multilateral Instrument will, 
upon entry into force, replace the pro visions in these treaties to include the equivalent of 
Article 9(2) of the OECD Model Tax Convention (OECD, 2017) . For the remaining two 
treaty partners that did not made a notification on the basis of Article 17(4), these treaty 
partners have already deposited its instrument of ratification of the Multilateral Instrument. 
Therefore, the Multilateral Instrument has entered into force for these treaties and  has 
superseded the relevant treaty provision s to include the equivalent of Article 9(2) of the 
OECD Mo del Tax Convention (OECD, 2017), but only to the extent that the provision 
contained in these treaties  relating to the granting of corresponding adjustments are 
incompatible with Article 17(1). 
62. Furthermore, for the remaining 11 treaties for which Japan did not make a notification 
on the basis of Article 17(4), all relevant treaty partners are signatories to the Multilateral 
Instrument and listed their treaty with Japan as a covered tax agreement under that 
instrument. Of the  partners to the 11  relevant treaties, two have, pursuant to Article 17(3), 
reserved the right not to apply Article 17(1).21 Four of the remaining nine treaty partners have 
already deposited their instruments of ratification of the Multilateral Instrument, following 
which the Multilateral Instrument has entered into force for the treaties between Japan and 
these treaty partners, and therefore has superseded the relevant treaty provision to include the 
equivalent of Article 9(2) of the OECD Model Tax Convention (OECD, 2017), but only to 
the extent that the provision contained in these treaties relating to the granting of 
corresponding adjustments are incompatible with Article 17(1). The provision  in the 
remaining five treaties will, upon the entry into force of the Multilateral Instrument for these 
treaties, be superseded by the Multilateral Instrument to include the equivalent of Article 9(2) 
of the OECD Model Tax Convention (OECD, 2017), but only to the extent that the provision 
contained in these treaties relating to the granting of cor responding adjustments are 
incompatible with Article 17(1). 
63. Peers did not provide input relating to this particular best practice.  
                                                      
21 With respect to the treaty with former Czechoslovakia, which Japan continues to apply to the Czech Republic and the Slovak 
Republic, the Czech Republic is one of the treaty partners that made a reservation on the basis of Article 17(3) of the Multilateral 
Instrument. The treaty is therefore included in these two treaties. The treaty with former Czechoslovakia will therefore not be 
modified concerning the Czech Republic. However, as regards the Slovak Republic, since it has already deposited its instrument 
of ratification of the Multilateral Instrument,  Article 17(1) of the Multilateral Instrument has superseded the relevant t reaty 
provision to include the equivalent of Article 9(2) of the OECD Model Tax Convention (OECD, 2017), but only to the extent 
that the provision contained in these treaties relating to the granting of corresponding adjustments are incompatible with Article 
17(1).

# Page 25


# Page 26
PART D: IMPLEMENTATION OF MAP AGREEMENTS  25 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
Part D 
 
Implementation of MAP agreements 
There are no best practices for Part D.

# Page 27


# Page 28
GLOSSARY  27 
 
INCLUSIVE FRAMEWORK OF BEPS: ACTION 14 MAKING DISPUTE RESOLUTION MORE EFFECTIVE MAP PEER REVIEW REPORT 
© OECD 2021 
      
Glossary 
Action 14 Minimum Standard The minimum standard as agreed upon in the final report on 
Action 14: Making Dispute Settlement Mechanisms More 
Effective 
MAP guidance Commissioner’s Directive on the Mutual Agreement Procedure  
Multilateral Instrument Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related 
Measures to Prevent Base Erosion and Profit Shifting 
OECD Model Tax Convention OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital as it 
read on 21 November 2017 
Q&A on MAP Guidance for taxpayers on the mutual agreement procedure in the 
form of an Q&A 
Terms of Reference Terms of reference to monitor and review the implementing of 
the BEPS Action 14 Minimum Standard to make dispute 
resolution mechanisms more effective 
(CTPA/CFA/NOE2(2016)45/REV1)

# Page 29
ctp.beps@oecd.org
For more information:
@OECDtax
Inclusive Framework on BEPS: Action 14
Making Dispute Resolution More Effective
MAP Peer Review Report
BEST PRACTICES
Denmark
2020
http://oe.cd/bepsaction14
