---
doc_id: "beps-a14-peer-review-documents-oecd-en"
title: "BEPS Action 14: peer review documents (Terms of Reference / Assessment Methodology) (OECD PDF)"
publisher: "OECD"
lang: "en"
license: "OECD (see source PDF)"
source_url: "http://www.oecd.org/tax/beps/beps-action-14-on-more-effective-dispute-resolution-peer-review-documents.pdf"
page_count: 82
generated_at: "2026-02-01"
---

# Page 1
BEPS Action 14 on More Effective 
Dispute Resolution Mechanisms 
PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS 
January 2023

# Page 2
   1 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
 
  
 
 
OECD/G20 Base Erosion and Profit Shifting Project 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BEPS Action 14 on More Effective Dispute 
Resolution Mechanisms – Peer Review 
Documents 
Updated December 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBE

# Page 3
2    
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
This document, as well as any data and any map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over 
any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area. 
This document was approved by the OECD/G20 Inclusive Framework on BEPS  on 14 December 2022 and prepared for 
publication by the OECD Secretariat.  
 
 
Please cite this publication as: 
OECD (2023), BEPS Action 14 on More Effective Dispute Resolution Mechanisms – Peer Review Documents, OECD/G20 Base Erosion and 
Profit Shifting Project , OECD, Paris . www.oecd.org/tax/beps/beps-action-14-on-more-effective-dispute-resolution-peer-review-
documents.pdf. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© OECD 2023 
 
 
The use of this work, whether digital or print, is governed by the Terms and Conditions to be found at www.oecd.org/termsandconditions

# Page 4
       3 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Table of contents 
Introduction 4 
1 Terms of Reference to monitor and review the implementing of the BEPS Action 14 
minimum standard to make dispute resolution mechanisms more effective 6 
2 Assessment Methodology for the monitoring and review of the implementation of 
the BEPS action 14 minimum standard to make dispute resolution mechanisms 
more effective  (updated December 2022) 18 
3 MAP Statistics Reporting Framework (updated December 2022) 48 
4 Guidance on Specific Information and Documentation Required to be Submitted 
with a Request for MAP Assistance 78

# Page 5
4        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Introduction 
The Action Plan on Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (“BEPS Action Plan”)1 identified 15 actions to address 
BEPS in a comprehensive manner. Recognising that the actions to counter BEPS must be complemented 
with actions that ensure certainty for taxpayers, Action 14 calls for effective dispute resolution mechanisms. 
In October 2015, the G20 Finance Ministers endorsed the BEPS package 2 which includes the report on  
Action 14: Making Dispute Resolution Mechanisms More Effective3 (“the 2015 Action 14 Report”) (OECD, 
2015[1]). This report contains a commitment by countries to implement a minimum standard to ensure that 
they resolve treaty-related disputes in a timely, effective and efficient manner. All members of the Inclusive 
Framework on BEPS4 (“Members”) commit to the implementation of the Action 14 minimum standard and 
to have their implementation reviewed pursuant to the Terms of Reference and Assessment Methodology 
agreed by Members. 
This compilation contains four documents, namely (i) the Terms of Reference; (ii) the Assessment 
Methodology; (iii) the Mutual Agreement Procedure (MAP) Statistics Reporting Framework; and (iv) the 
Guidance on Specific Information and Documentation Required to be Submitted with a Request for MAP 
Assistance. 
The Terms of Reference translates the Action 14 minimum st andard into 21 elements. These elements 
are complemented by 12 best practices. The best practices are not part of the minimum standard and thus 
will not affect the assessment of Members. The Terms of Reference assess a Member’s legal and 
administrative framework, including the practical implementation of this framework to determine how its 
MAP regime performs relative to the 21 elements in the following four key areas – (A) preventing disputes; 
(B) availability and access to MAP; (C) resolution of MAP cases ; and (D) implementation of MAP  
agreements. 
The Assessment Methodology establishes detailed procedures and guidelines for the Action 14 Peer 
Review and Monitoring process. The initial peer review process involves two stages. Stage 1 involves the 
review of a Member’s implementation of the minimum standard based on its legal framework for MAP and 
the application of this framework in  practice. Stage 2 involves the review of the measures taken by the 
Member to address any shortcomings identified in its Stage 1 Peer Review. Following these reviews, all 
Members would be subject to continued monitoring: jurisdictions that have “meaningful MAP experience” 
would undergo a full peer review process from 2024 once every four years and those that do not would 
undergo a two-stage simplified peer review process from 2023. 
The commitment by Members to implement the Action 14 minimum standard includes a commitment to 
provide timely and complete reporting of MAP statistics pursuant to an agreed reporting framework. The 
MAP Statistics Reporting Framework reflects a collaborative approach for the resolution of MAP cases 
through the adoption of common timeline for both competent authorities to resolve MAP cases. With effect 
from reporting period 2016, Members will report MAP stati stics based on common definitions of terms, 
common rules on counting of MAP cases; and common reporting of MAP outcomes based on different 
categories of outcomes.

# Page 6
INTRODUCTION  5 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
The Action 14 minimum standard also requires Members to publish MAP guidance that identify the specific 
information and documentation that a taxpayer is required to submit with a request for MAP assistance. 
Members should not limit access to MAP based on the argument that insufficient information was provided 
if the taxpayer has provided the required information. The Guidance on Specific Information and 
Documentation Required to be Submitted with a Request for MAP Assistance  could be used by 
Members in draw ing up their own MAP guidance and could also provide guidance to taxpayers in their 
preparation of a MAP submission. 
Reference 
 
OECD (2015), Making Dispute Resolution Mechanisms More Effective, Action 14 - 2015 Final 
Report, OECD/G20 Base Erosion and Profit Shifting Project, OECD Publishing, Paris, 
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264241633-en. 
[1] 
 
 
Notes
1 Available at https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264202719-en.  
2 Available at www.oecd.org/tax/beps-2015-final-reports.htm.  
3 Available a t www.oecd.org/tax/making-dispute-resolution-mechanisms-more-effective-action-14-2015-final-report-
9789264241633-en.htm.  
4 Available at www.oecd.org/tax/beps/inclusive-framework-on-beps-composition.pdf.

# Page 7
6        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Introduction 
1. The Action Plan on Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (“BEPS Action Plan”) 1 published by the 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (“OECD”) in 2013 at the request of the G20 
identified 15 actions to address BEPS in a comprehensive manner. Recognising that the actions to counter 
BEPS must be complemented with actio ns that ensure certainty and predictability for businesses, one of 
the BEPS actions, Action 14, calls for effective dispute resolution mechanisms:  
ACTION 14 
Make dispute resolution mechanisms more effective 
 
Develop solutions to address obstacles that prevent countries from [re]solving treaty-related 
disputes under MAP, including the absence of arbitration provisions in most treaties and the fact 
that access to MAP and arbitration may be denied in certain cases. 
2. In October 2015, the BEPS package compris ing an explanatory statement and 13 reports 
addressing BEPS concerns identified in the BEPS Action Plan was approved by the OECD and endorsed 
by the G20 Finance Ministers. 2 One of the reports , Report on Action 14: Making Dispute Resolution 
Mechanisms More Effective (“the 2015 Action 14 Report”)  (OECD, 2015[1]), discusses the obstacles that 
prevent countries from resolving treaty -related disputes under the mutual agreement procedure (“MAP”) 
and recommended measures to overcome such obstacles. 
3. Recognising the importance of removing double taxation as an obstacle to cross-border trade and 
investment, the 2015 Action 14 Report  (OECD, 2015 [1]) also reflected the commitment of countries to  
implement a minimum standard (“the Action 14 minimum standard”) to ensure that they resolve treaty -
related disputes in a timely, effective and efficient manner. The minimum standard is complemented by a 
set of best practices. Furthermore, to ensure the ef fective implementation of the minimum standard, 
countries also committed to have their compliance with the minimum standard reviewed by their peers – 
i.e. the other members of the Forum on Tax Administration MAP Forum (“FTA MAP Forum”). In addition, 
a number of countries 3 also consider that mandatory binding arbitration is the best way of ensuring that 
tax treaty disputes are effectively resolved through MAP and have committed to adopt and implement 
mandatory binding arbitration as a way to resolve disputes  that otherwise prevent the resolution of cases 
through the mutual agreement procedure. 
4. In this regard, the 2015 Action 14 Report (OECD, 2015[1]) mandated that the Committee on Fiscal 
Affairs (“CFA”) through its Workin g Party No. 1 on Tax Conventions and Related Questions (“Working 
1 Terms of Reference to monitor and review the implementing of 
the BEPS Action 14 minimum standard to make dispute 
resolution mechanisms more effective

# Page 8
       7 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Party 1”) and the FTA MAP Forum develop the Terms of Reference and the Assessment Methodology for 
the monitoring of the implementation of the Action 14 minimum standard by all OECD and G20 co untries, 
as well as jurisdictions that commit to the minimum standard (see mandate in Annex 1.A.). 
The Action 14 minimum standard for the resolution of tax treaty-related disputes 
5. Removing obstacles that double taxation presents is key to the development of economic relations 
between jurisdictions. In this regard, jurisdictions enter into tax treaties with the aim of removing such 
obstacles and to provide taxpayers with certainty on the tax treatment of their cross border trade, 
investment and activities. Where doubts or difficulties arise in relation to the interpretation or application of 
the tax treaty, or where taxpayers enter into disputes with tax authorities on the tax treaty treatment of their 
activities, Article 25 4 of the OECD Model Tax Convention  on Income and on Capital (“OECD Model Tax 
Convention”) (OECD, 2019[2]), provides a mechanism – the mutual agreement procedure (“MAP”), that 
allows the resolution of such difficulties or disputes. 
6. The MAP, which is ind ependent from the ordinary legal remedies available under domestic law, 
allows the competent authorities of the Contracting Parties to resolve differences or difficulties regarding 
the interpretation or application of the Convention on a mutually -agreed basis. This mechanism seeks to 
ensure the proper application and interpretation of tax treaties so that taxpayers entitled to the benefits of 
the treaty are not subject to taxation by either of the Contracting Parties which is not in accordance with 
the terms of the treaty. 
7. The Action 14 minimum standard aims to  strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of the MAP 
process. The minimum standard is constituted by specific measures that jurisdictions will take to ensure 
that they resolve treaty -related disputes in a timely, effective and efficient manner and is complemented 
by a set of best practices. The elements of the minimum standard set out in the 2015 Action 14 Report  
(OECD, 2015[1]) seeks to achieve the following thr ee general objectives in order to ensure that dispute 
resolution mechanisms are more effective: 
 Jurisdictions should ensure that treaty obligations related to MAP are fully implemented in good 
faith and that MAP cases are resolved in a timely manner; 
 Jurisdictions should ensure that administrative processes promote the prevention and timely 
resolution of treaty-related disputes; and 
 Jurisdictions should ensure that taxpayers that meet the requirements of paragraph 1 of Article 25 
of the OECD Model Tax Convention (OECD, 2019[2]) can access the MAP. 
8. In other words, for the MAP to be more effective it should: (i) allow the competent authorities to 
reach agreements on how to prevent tax treaty -related disputes from arising i n the first instance, (ii) be 
available and accessible to taxpayers where tax-treaty disputes do arise; and (iii) be effective in resolving 
such disputes, including the timely implementation of the agreements that are reached by competent 
authorities through the MAP process. 
9. Jurisdictions should enhance their competent authority relationships and work collectively to 
improve the effectiveness of the MAP by becoming members of the FTA MAP Forum and fully participate 
in the work of the FTA MAP Forum. A jurisd iction’s compliance with the Action 14 minimum standard will 
be reviewed by its peers in the context of the FTA MAP Forum. The Terms of Reference describe the 
Action 14 minimum standard and break them down into 21 elements to reflect the four key areas of an 
effective dispute resolution mechanism - preventing disputes, availability and access to MAP, resolution of 
MAP cases and implementation of MAP agreements. These elements are complemented by 12 best 
practices. The elements and best practices should be interpreted based on the 2015 Action 14 Report and 
in accordance with the Commentary on Article 25 of the OECD Model Tax Convention  (OECD, 2019[2]).5 
The best practices are not part of the minimum standard and whether or not a jurisdiction has implemented

# Page 9
8        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
the best practices will not be peer reviewed or monitored, nor will it affect the assessment of the assessed 
jurisdiction. Jurisdictions are free, however, to identify best practices they have adopted. 
10. The minimum standard contained in the 2015 Action 14 Report has been translated into the Terms 
of Reference to facilitate the review of an assessed jurisdiction’s compliance with the Action 14 minimum 
standard. The Terms of Reference  do not alter the Action 14 minimum standard and in case of any 
differences arising from the interpretation of any elements of the Terms of Reference  and the Action 14 
minimum standard, the review of the assessed jurisdiction shall be conducted based on the minimum 
standard contained in the 2015 Action 14 Report. The Terms of Reference have been designed to assess 
the jurisdictions’ legal and administrative frameworks and the practical implementation of the frameworks 
to determine how a jurisdiction’s dispute resolution mechanisms operate with respect to the basis of the 
minimum standard of the Action 14 Report in the following areas: 
 Preventing disputes (Part A); 
 Availability and access to MAP (Part B); 
 Resolution of MAP cases (Part C); and 
 Implementation of MAP agreements (Part D). 
11. They will also serve as a basis for questionnaires to be developed by the FTA MAP Forum, which 
will form the basis of the reviews to be conducted by the FTA MAP Forum. Jurisdictions should provide 
timely and complete responses to the questionnaires including timely and complete reporting of MAP 
statistics pursuant to an agreed template and reporting framework and information on their MAP profiles 
which will be published on a shared public platform based on an agreed template. 
A.  Preventing disputes – Elements of the minimum standard 
12. Taxpayers desire to have certainty on the tax treaty treatment of their cross -border trade and 
investment and clarity on the application and interpretation of the tax trea ty. Such clarity and certainty is 
equally important for tax authorities. The legal authority for competent authorities to clarify any difficulties 
or doubts arising from the interpretation or application of their tax treaties is derived from tax treaty 
provisions that follow paragraph 3 of Article 25. In this regard, the Action 14 minimum standard requires 
that: 
A.1.  Jurisdictions should ensure that their tax treaties contain a provision which requires the 
competent authority of their jurisdiction to endeavour to resolve by mutual agreement any 
difficulties or doubts arising as to the interpretation or application of their tax treaties. 6 
A.2.  Jurisdictions with bilateral advance pricing arrangement (“APA”)7 programmes should provide 
for the roll-back8 of APAs in appropriate cases, subject to the applicable time limits (such as 
statutes of limitation for assessment) where the relevant facts and circumstances in the earlier 
tax years are the same and subject to the verification of these facts and circums tances on 
audit. 
Best practices 
B.P.1. Jurisdictions should implement bilateral APA programmes. 
B.P.2. Jurisdictions should have appropriate procedures in place to publish agreements reached 
by competent authorities on difficulties or doubts arising as to the interpretation or 
application of their tax treaties9 in appropriate cases. 
B.P.3. Jurisdictions’ published MAP guidance should provide guidance on APAs.

# Page 10
       9 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
B.P.4. Jurisdictions should develop the “global awareness” of the audit/examination functions 
involved in international matters through the delivery of the Forum on Tax Administration’s 
“Global Awareness Training Module” to appropriate personnel. 
B.  Availability and access to MAP – Elements of the minimum standard 
13. Where tax treaty -related disputes ari se between taxpayers and the tax authorities, a dispute 
resolution mechanism should be available to taxpayers based on the tax treaty irrespective of the remedies 
provided by the domestic laws of the treaty partners. Paragraph 1 of Article 25 provides a mechanism, the 
MAP, for the resolution of tax treaty -related disputes. Jurisdictions should ensure that taxpayers have 
access to MAP and that information relating to taxpayer access to MAP is readily available and accessible 
to the public.  
14. To ensure that taxpayers have access to MAP, the Action 14 minimum standard requires that:  
B.1.  Jurisdictions should ensure that their tax treaties contain a MAP provision which provides that 
when the taxpayer considers that the actions of one or both of the Contracting Parties result 
or will result for the taxpayer in taxation not in accordance with the provisions of the tax treaty, 
the taxpayer, may irrespective of the remedies provided by the domestic law of those 
Contracting Parties, make a request for MAP assistance,  and that the taxpayer can present 
the request within a period of no less than three years from the first notification of the action 
resulting in taxation not in accordance with the provisions of the tax treaty. 10 
B.2.  Jurisdictions should ensure that either (i) their tax treaties contain a provision which provides 
that the taxpayer can make a request for MAP assistance to the competent authority of either 
Contracting Party 11, or (ii) where the treaty does not permit a MAP request to be made to 
either Contracting Party and the competent authority who received the MAP request from the 
taxpayer does not consider the taxpayer’s objection to be justified, the competent authority 
should implement a bilateral consultation or notification process which allows the ot her 
competent authority to provide its views on the case (such consultation shall not be interpreted 
as consultation as to how to resolve the case). 
B.3.  Jurisdictions should provide access to MAP in transfer pricing cases. 
B.4.  Jurisdictions should provide access to MAP in cases in which there is a disagreement between 
the taxpayer and the tax authorities making the adjustment as to whether the conditions for 
the application of a treaty anti-abuse provision have been met or as to whether the application 
of a domestic law anti-abuse provision is in conflict with the provisions of a treaty. 
B.5.  Jurisdictions should not deny access to MAP in cases where there is an audit settlement 
between tax authorities and taxpayers. If jurisdictions have an administrat ive or statutory 
dispute settlement/resolution process independent from the audit and examination functions 
and that can only be accessed through a request by the taxpayer, jurisdictions may limit 
access to the MAP with respect to the matters resolved through that process.12 
B.6.  Jurisdictions should not limit access to MAP based on the argument that insufficient 
information was provided if the taxpayer has provided the required information based on the 
rules, guidelines and procedures made available to tax payers on access to and the use of 
MAP. 
B.7.  Jurisdictions should ensure that their tax treaties contain a provision under which competent 
authorities may consult together for the elimination of double taxation in cases not provided 
for in their tax treaties.13

# Page 11
10        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
15. To facilitate taxpayers’ access to MAP, jurisdictions should ensure transparency relating to their 
MAP regimes – information on how to access MAP must be available, clear and easily accessible to the 
public. In this regard, the Action 14 minimum standard requires that: 
B.8. Jurisdictions should publish clear rules, guidelines and procedures on access to and use of 
the MAP and include the specific information and documentation that should be submitted in 
a taxpayer’s request for MAP assistance. 
B.9. Jurisdictions should take appropriate measures to make rules, guidelines and procedures on 
access to and use of the MAP available and easily accessible to the public and should publish 
their jurisdiction MAP profiles on a shared public platform pursuant to the agreed template. 
B.10. Jurisdictions should clarify in their MAP guidance that audit settlements between tax 
authorities and taxpayers do not preclude access to MAP. If jurisdictions have an 
administrative or statutory dispute settlement/resolution proc ess independent from the audit 
and examination functions and that can only be accessed through a request by the taxpayer, 
and jurisdictions limit access to the MAP with respect to the matters resolved through that 
process, jurisdictions should notify their  treaty partners of such administrative or statutory 
processes and should expressly address the effects of those processes with respect to the 
MAP in their public guidance on such processes and in their public MAP programme 
guidance.14 
Best practices 
B.P.5. Jurisdictions should implement appropriate administrative measures to facilitate recourse to 
the MAP to resolve treaty-related disputes, recognising the general principle that the choice 
of remedies should remain with the taxpayer. 
B.P.6. Jurisdictions’ published MAP guidance should provide that taxpayers will be allowed access 
to the MAP so that the competent authorities may resolve through consultation the double 
taxation that can arise in the case of bona fide taxpayer-initiated foreign adjustments.15 
B.P.7. Jurisdictions’ published MAP guidance should provide guidance on multilateral MAPs.  
B.P.8. Jurisdictions should take appropriate measures to provide for a suspension of collections 
procedures during the period a MAP case is pending. Such a suspension of collections 
should be available, at a minimum, under the same conditions as apply to a person pursuing 
a domestic administrative or judicial remedy. 
C. Resolution of MAP cases – Elements of the minimum standard 
16. An effective dispute resolution mechanism  must be capable of resolving disputes in a timely and 
principled manner. The legal authority for competent authorities to come together to discuss a MAP case 
with a view to resolving the case to avoid taxation which is not in accordance with the tax treat y may be 
derived from paragraph 2 of Article 25. The Action 14 minimum standard requires that:  
C.1. Jurisdictions should ensure that their tax treaties contain a provision which requires that the 
competent authority who receives a MAP request from the taxp ayer, shall endeavour, if the 
objection from the taxpayer appears to be justified and the competent authority is not itself 
able to arrive at a satisfactory solution, to resolve the MAP case by mutual agreement with 
the competent authority of the other Contracting Party, with a view to the avoidance of taxation 
which is not in accordance with the tax treaty.16

# Page 12
       11 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
C.2. Jurisdictions should seek to resolve MAP cases 17 within an average time frame of 24 
months.18 This time frame applies to both jurisdictions (i.e. the jurisdiction which receives the 
MAP request from the taxpayer and its treaty partner).19 
C.3. Jurisdictions should ensure that adequate resources are provided to the MAP function.  
C.4. Jurisdictions should ensure that the staff in charge of MAP processes  have the authority to 
resolve MAP cases in accordance with the terms of the applicable tax treaty, in particular 
without being dependent on the approval or the direction of the tax administration personnel 
who made the adjustments at issue or being influe nced by considerations of the policy that 
the jurisdictions would like to see reflected in future amendments to the treaty.  
C.5. Jurisdictions should not use performance indicators for their competent authority functions 
and staff in charge of MAP processes based on the amount of sustained audit adjustments or 
maintaining tax revenue. 
C.6. Jurisdictions should provide transparency with respect to their positions on MAP arbitration.20 
Best practices 
B.P.9. Jurisdictions should implement appropriate procedures to permit, in certain cases and after 
an initial tax assessment, requests made by taxpayer which are within the time period 
provided for in the tax treaty for the multi-year resolution through the MAP of recurring issues 
with respect to filed tax years, w here the relevant facts and circumstances are the same 
and subject to the verification of such facts and circumstances on audit. 
B.P.10. Jurisdictions should publish an explanation of the relationship between the MAP and 
domestic law administrative and judicial remedies.21 
B.P.11. Jurisdictions’ published MAP guidance should provide guidance on the consideration of 
interest and penalties in the mutual agreement procedure. 
B.P.12. Jurisdictions should include paragraph 2 of Article 9 of the OECD Model Tax Convention in 
their tax treaties. 
D. Implementation of MAP agreements – Elements of the minimum standard 
17. Any competent authority agreement reached on a MAP case by itself would not provide any relief 
to the taxpayer unless the agreement is implemented. Th e second sentence of paragraph 2 of Article 25 
of the OECD Model Tax Convention  (OECD, 2019 [2]) requires that the agreement reached shall be 
implemented notwithstanding any time limits in the domestic law of the jurisdictions. The Action 14 
minimum standard requires that: 
D.1. Jurisdictions should implement any agreement reached in MAP discussions, including by 
making appropriate adjustments to the tax assessed in transfer pricing cases.  
D.2. Agreements reached by competent authorities through the MAP process should be 
implemented on a timely basis. 
D.3. Jurisdictions should either (i) provide in the ir tax treaties that any mutual agreement reached 
through MAP shall be implemented notwithstanding any time limits in their domestic law22, or 
(ii) be willing to accept alternative treaty provisions that limit the time during which a 
Contracting Party may make an adjustment pursuant to Article 9(1) or Article 7(2), in order to 
avoid late adjustments with respect to which MAP relief will not be available. 23

# Page 13
12        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Output of the Peer Review and Monitoring process 
18. In accordance with the 2015 Action 14 Report  (OECD, 2015 [1]), the core output of the peer 
monitoring process will come in the form of a report. The report will identify and describe the strengths and 
any shortcomings that exist and provide recommendations as to how the shortcomings might be addressed 
by the assessed jurisdiction. 
19. Given the importance of the MAP for taxpayers seeking to ensure that their taxation is in 
accordance with tax treaties, the report of an assessed jurisdiction should contain information on the MAP 
regime of the assessed jurisdiction to assist taxpayers’ compliance with the requirements to access and 
the use of MAP. Such information will also facilitate a jurisdiction in its request to commence discussion of 
the MAP case with its treaty partner by ensuring that all the administrative and procedural requirements of 
its treaty partner have been met. 
20. The FTA MAP Forum will produce on a regular basis reports on the outcome of the reviews 
conducted (“the FTA MAP Forum Report”) on its members’ compliance wi th the minimum standard and 
measures taken by its members to improve their MAP regime. This FTA MAP Forum Report which will be 
published on a shared public platform will include the purpose and background of this work conducted by 
the FTA MAP Forum, an exe cutive summary on the outcome of the reviews conducted and will comprise 
the individual reports of the assessed jurisdictions. Each jurisdiction’s report will include a description of its 
legal and administrative framework for the MAP and the practical application of the framework. This will be 
presented under 4 headings: 
(i) Preventing disputes 
(ii) Availability and access to MAP 
(iii) Resolution of MAP cases 
(iv) Implementation of MAP agreements. 
21. The individual report of an assessed jurisdiction shall note all efforts made by the assessed 
jurisdiction to implement the minimum standard including the plans shared by the assessed jurisdiction to 
make legislative or procedural changes to implement the minimum standard taking into consideration that 
the assessed jurisdiction migh t not have fully implemented elements of the minimum standard given the 
time from its adoption to the time of its review. To assist the assessed jurisdiction in fully implementing the 
minimum standard, the individual report of an assessed jurisdiction will thus also identify and describe any 
shortcomings that exist in relation to the implementation of each of the elements of the minimum standard 
and provide recommendations as to how these shortcomings might be addressed. Recommendations 
should be specific and provide guidance to the jurisdiction as to what is expected.

# Page 14
       13 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
References 
 
OECD (2019), Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital 2017 (Full Version), OECD 
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/g2g972ee-en. 
[2] 
OECD (2015), Making Dispute Resolution Mechanisms More Effective, Action 14 - 2015 Final 
Report, OECD/G20 Base Erosion and Profit Shifting Project, OECD Publishing, Paris, 
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264241633-en. 
[1] 
 
 
Notes

# Page 15
14        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
1 Available at https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264202719-en.  
2 Available at www.oecd.org/tax/beps-2015-final-reports.htm.  
3 Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the  Netherlands, New 
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.  
4 The Report on Action 14 contains changes to Article 25 of the OECD Model Tax Convention and its  Commentary. 
Other changes to the Commentary will be included in the next update of the OECD Model  Tax Convention to reflect 
the conclusions of the Report on Action 14. In this regard, all references to Article  25 and its Commentary shall be 
read in the context of Article 25 and its Commentary as amended by the Report on Action 14 and the changes which 
will be made to the Commentary in the next update of the OECD Model Tax Convention. 
5 The reference to commentaries on Article 25 should be understood as those referred to in the 2015 Action 14 Report. 
6 See paragraph 3 of Article 25 and its Commentary. 
7 An APA is “an arrangement that determines, in advance of controlled transactions, an appropriate set of criteria (e.g. 
method, comparables and appropriate adjustments thereto, critical assumptions as to future events) for the 
determination of the transfer pricing for those transactions over a fixed period of time.” (see definition of APA in the 
OECD Transfer Pricing Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and Tax Administrations  (“Transfer Pricing 
Guidelines”)). A request for an APA is not a MAP case for purposes of the MAP Statistics Reporting Framework and 
element C.2. 
8 Situations may arise in which the issues resolved through an APA are relevant with respect to previous filed tax years 
not included within the original scope of the APA. The concept of “roll -back” is further elaborated in paragraph 4.136 
of Section F (Advance pricing arrangement) of Chapter IV of the Transfer Pricing Guidelines and in paragraph 69 of 
Section D.4.2 (Possible retrospective application (“Roll back”)) of the Annex to Chapter IV (Guidelines for Conducting 
Advance Pricing Arrangements under the Mutual Agreement Procedure (“MAP APAs”)) of the Transfer Pricing 
Guidelines. Simply put, the “roll -back” of the APA is understood to mean th at the outcome of the APA is applied to 
previous filed tax years not included within the original scope of the APA. A request for the roll -back of an APA is not 
a MAP case for purposes of the MAP Statistics Reporting Framework and element C.2. 
9 See first sentence of paragraph 3 of Article 25 and its Commentary. 
10 See paragraph 1 of Article 25 and its Commentary. 
11 See paragraph 1 of Article 25 and its Commentary. 
12 The relevant commitment under 2.6 of the Action 14 minimum standard deals only with access t o MAP, which, 
consistently with what has been explained in paragraph 16 of the Report on Action 14 regarding the element 1.2, is 
distinct from any obligation to endeavour to resolve the case pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 25 and from any 
obligation to submit an issue to arbitration that may arise under treaties that contain an arbitration provision, whether 
mandatory or not. Elements B.5 and B.10 of the Terms of Reference should therefore not be interpreted as including 
any implicit commitment with respect to these other obligations. 
13 See second sentence of paragraph 3 of Article 25 and its Commentary. 
14 The relevant commitment under 2.6 of the Action 14 minimum standard deals only with access to MAP, which, 
consistently with what has been explained in paragraph 16 of the Report on Action 14 regarding the element 1.2, is 
distinct from any obligation to endeavour to resolve the case pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 25 and from any 
obligation to submit an issue to arbitration that may arise under treatie s that contain an arbitration provision, whether

# Page 16
       15 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
 
mandatory or not. Elements B.5 and B.10 of the Terms of Reference should therefore not be interpreted as including 
any implicit commitment with respect to these other obligations. 
15 Taxpayer-initiated foreign adjustments are taxpayer -initiated adjustments permitted under the domestic laws of a 
treaty partner which allow a taxpayer under appropriate circumstances to amend a previously-filed tax return to adjust 
(i) the price for a transaction between associate d enterprises or (ii) the profits attributable to a permanent 
establishment, with a view to reporting a result that is, in the view of the taxpayer, in accordance with the arm’s length 
principle. For such purposes, a taxpayer-initiated foreign adjustment should be considered bona fide where it reflects 
the good faith effort of the taxpayer to report correctly the taxable income from a controlled transaction or the profits 
attributable to a permanent establishment and where the taxpayer has otherwise timely and properly fulfilled all of its 
obligations related to such taxable income or profits under the tax laws of the two Contracting Parties. (see Best 
Practice 9 in the Action 14 Report) 
16 See paragraph 2 of Article 25 and its Commentary. 
17 A MAP case for this purpose refers to a MAP case that is received by a competent authority from the taxpayer on 
or after 1 January 2016 and is defined in Annex 3.D. of the MAP Statistics Reporting Framework. 
18 The average time frame to resolve MAP cases shall be computed in accordance with the method of computation 
provided in the MAP Statistics Reporting Framework. The “start date” and “end date” for purposes of computing the 
time taken to resolve a MAP case is defined in the MAP Statistics Reporting Framework. These stat istical purposes 
should be distinguished from the purposes of time frames in arbitration provisions; the time frames relevant in that 
latter context must be determined based on the provisions of the relevant arbitration clause and/or relevant competent 
authority agreements on the application of such clause. 
19 Given that the average time frame in element C.2. applies to both jurisdictions, in the review of an assessed 
jurisdiction, if the average time taken to resolve MAP cases exceeds 24 months arising from  delays caused by its 
treaty partners, such delays shall not lead to a recommendation that the assessed jurisdiction needs to improve the 
average time taken to resolve MAP cases. 
20 A jurisdiction should provide its position on arbitration in its MAP profil e which should be published on a shared 
public platform. In addition, OECD members and non -OECD economies which have set out their positions on the 
OECD Model Tax Convention should provide their position on arbitration in the OECD Model Tax Convention. 
21 The public guidance should address, in particular,  whether the competent authority considers itself to be legally 
bound to follow a domestic court decision in the MAP or whether the competent authority will not deviate from a 
domestic court decision as a matter of administrative policy or practice. 
22 See second sentence of paragraph 2 of Article 25 and its Commentary. 
23 See paragraph 62 of the Commentary on Article 7 and paragraph 10 of the Commentary on Article 9.

# Page 17
16        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Annex 1.A. Mandate for the development of the 
Terms of Reference and the Assessment 
Methodology 
Pursuant to element 1.6 of the Action 14 minimum standard, countries commit to have their compl iance 
with the minimum standard reviewed by their peers – i.e. the other members of the FTA MAP Forum (as 
provided in element 1.4 of the minimum standard, countries should become members of the FTA MAP 
Forum and participate fully in its work). This review will take place through a monitoring mechanism, the 
framework for which is described in Section I.C of this Report. Such monitoring is essential to ensure the 
meaningful implementation of the minimum standard and will be conducted pursuant to Terms of 
Reference and an Assessment Methodology to be developed by the OECD Committee on Fiscal Affairs 
through its Working Party No. 1 on Tax Conventions and Related Questi ons (Working Party 1) and the 
Forum on Tax Administration MAP Forum (the FTA MAP Forum). The mandate for the development of the 
Terms of Reference and the Assessment Methodology is set out below: 
Preamble 
Recognising that the conclusions of the work on Action 14 of the BEPS Action Plan reflect the agreement 
that countries should commit to a minimum standard comprising a number of specific elements that are 
intended to ensure that treaty-related disputes are resolved in a timely, effective and efficient manner;  
Noting that the conclusions of the work on Action 14 also include agreement that the implem entation of 
the minimum standard should be evaluated through a peer monitoring mechanism in order to ensure that 
the commitments embodied in the minimum standard are effectively satisfied, and that all OECD and G20 
countries, as well as jurisdictions that commit to the minimum standard, will undergo reviews pursuant to 
that monitoring mechanism; 
Considering that the peer monitoring process will require the development of Terms of Reference that will 
be used to assess the implementation of the Action 14 mini mum standard and of an Assessment 
Methodology that will establish procedures and guidelines for the peer monitoring process;  
The countries participating in the OECD-G20 BEPS Project have agreed that Terms of Reference and an 
Assessment Methodology will be developed by the OECD Committee on Fiscal Affairs, through its Working 
Party No. 1 on Tax Conventions and Related Questions and the Forum on Tax Administration MAP Forum 
(the FTA MAP Forum) pursuant to the following mandate. 
A. Objective 
The OECD Committee on Fiscal Affairs through its Working Party No. 1 on Tax Conventions and Related 
Questions and the Forum on Tax Administration MAP Forum (the FTA MAP Forum) shall develop the core 
documents for the monitoring of the implementation of the Action 14 minimum  standard: the Terms of 
Reference and the Assessment Methodology. The Terms of Reference  will be based on the elements of 
the minimum standard and will break down these elements into specific aspects against which jurisdictions’ 
legal frameworks, MAP progr amme guidance and actual implementation of the minimum standard are 
assessed; they will provide a clear roadmap for the monitoring process and thereby ensure that the 
assessment of all jurisdictions is consistent and complete. The Assessment Methodology  will establish 
detailed procedures and guidelines for the peer monitoring of OECD and G20 countries and other

# Page 18
       17 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
committed jurisdictions by the FTA MAP Forum, which will be open to all such countries participating on 
an equal footing and will include a system for assessing the implementation of the minimum standard. 
B. Participation 
The Terms of Reference  and the Assessment Methodology  shall be developed jointly by the OECD 
Committee on Fiscal Affairs, through its Working Party 1 on Tax Conventions and Related Questions, and 
the FTA MAP Forum, with all countries participating on an equal footing.  
C. Duration and term 
The development of the Terms of Reference and the Assessment Methodology shall start no later than 
November 2015. Working Party 1 and the FTA MAP Forum shall aim to conclude their work on the Terms 
of Reference and the Assessment Methodology by the end of the first quarter of 2016.

# Page 19
18        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Introduction 
1. The Action 14 BEPS Report: Making Dispute Resolution Mechanisms More Effective - 2015 Final 
Report (“the 2015 Action 14 Report”) (OECD, 2015[1]) was approved by the OECD Committee on Fiscal 
Affairs (“CFA”) in September, presented to the OECD Council and endorsed by the G20 Finance Ministers 
at their meeting on 8 October 2015. 1 The 2015 Action 14 Report (OECD, 2015[1]) contains a commitment 
by countries engaged in the work to make important changes in their approach to dispute resoluti on. In 
particular, these countries commit to the implementation of a minimum standard (“the minimum standard”) 
to ensure that they resolve treaty -related disputes in a timely, effective and efficient manner and to have 
their compliance with the minimum standard reviewed by their peers – i.e. the other members of the Forum 
on Tax Administration MAP Forum 2 (“the FTA MAP Forum” or “the Forum”). The FTA MAP Forum brings 
together all OECD and G20 countries and will be open to all jurisdictions that commit to the  minimum 
standard. All members of the Forum will participate in the work on an equal footing. This review will be 
conducted through a peer-based monitoring mechanism that will report regularly to the G20.  
2. In accordance with the mandate contained in the 2015 Action 14 Report (OECD, 2015[1]), the CFA, 
through its Working Party No. 1 on Tax Conventions and Related Questions (“ Working Party 1”) and the 
FTA MAP Forum will develop the Terms of Reference  and Assessment Methodology3 for the monitoring 
and peer review of the implementation of the minimum standard. The peer reviews will include an 
evaluation of the legal framework provided by the jurisdiction’s tax treaties and domestic law and 
regulations, and its MAP programme guidance. The minimum standard is also complemented by a set of 
best practices.  
3. The peer review and monitoring of the implementation of the minimum standard by members of 
the FTA MAP Forum and non-members4 identified by the Forum as relevant to this work will be conducted 
by the FTA MAP Forum. The process begins in 2016 with the objective of publishing the first reports in the 
second half of 2017.  
4. The Assessment Methodology contained in this note establishes detailed procedures and 
guidelines for a 2-stage approach to peer review and monitoring of the implementation of the minimum 
standard. Stage 1 involves the review of the assessed jurisdiction’s implementation of the minimum 
standard based on the jurisdiction’s legal framework for MAP and the application of this f ramework in 
practice (“Stage 1 Peer Review ”). Stage 2 involves the review of the measures taken by the assessed 
jurisdiction to address any shortcomings identified in its Stage 1 Peer Review (“Stage 2 Peer Monitoring”). 
The review of non-members of the FTA MAP Forum will occur in a manner similar to the review of members 
to the greatest extent possible. While participation of non -members should be encouraged, it is important 
2 Assessment Methodology for the monitoring and review of the 
implementation of the BEPS action 14 minimum standard to 
make dispute resolution mechanisms more effective  (updated 
December 2022)

# Page 20
       19 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
that the review of non -members be based on best available infor mation in the absence of such 
participation.  
5. The Assessment Methodology contained in this note should be reviewed by 2020 in light of the 
experience in conducting peer monitoring, keeping in mind the need for an Assessment Methodology which 
effectively improves the shortcomings identified in the peer review reports with the aim of ensuring an 
effective MAP regime to benefit both governments and taxpayers.  
Peer Review and Monitoring process  
6. All OECD and G20 countries, and other jurisdictions which have com mitted to the minimum 
standard, will work collectively to improve the effectiveness of the MAP by becoming members of the FTA 
MAP Forum . To assist members in improving the effectiveness of their MAP regime, every member’s 
compliance with the minimum standa rd will be reviewed by other members of the Forum, in accordance 
with an assessment schedule to be developed by the FTA MAP Forum. The FTA MAP Forum should take 
into consideration the MAP experience and the MAP inventory  of jurisdictions in the scheduling of their 
review, including whether jurisdictions already compile statistical information relating to MAP or published 
their MAP profile.  
7. The assessment schedule should ensure that the Stage 1 Peer Reviews begin in 2016 and that 
the Stage 1 Peer Review of all 44 countries5 that have committed to the BEPS outputs starts no later than 
end 2018. Furthermore, any country or jurisdiction that participates as BEPS Associates in an extension 
of the OECD’s Committee on Fiscal Affairs (CFA) under the framework where BEPS Associates will work 
on an equal footing with the OECD and G20 members on the remaining standard-setting under the BEPS 
Project, as well as the review and monitoring of the implementation of the BEPS package, will also undergo 
the same peer review and monitoring process . However, the MAP Forum should defer the review of any 
such member that is a developing country and is not an OECD or G20 country if that member has not yet 
encountered meaningful levels of MAP requests and there is no feedback from other members of the FTA 
MAP Forum indicating that the jurisdiction’s MAP regime requires improvement. In any case, all members 
of the FTA MAP Forum should report statistics in accordance with the agreed framework for reporting of 
MAP statistics and publish their MAP Profiles on a shared public platform pursuant to the agreed template. 
In addition, the assessment schedule should ensure that the Stage 2 Peer Monitoring of all 44 countries 
that have committed to the BEPS outputs be completed by 2020.   
8. The Stage 1 Peer Review and Stage 2 Peer Monitoring will be desk-based and will be co-ordinated 
by the Secretariat of the FTA MAP Forum (“the Secretariat”). This section contains details concerning the 
methodology for conducting these reviews as follows: 
 Part A – Obtaining inputs for the Stage 1 Peer Review 
 Part B – Drafting and approval of a Stage 1 Peer Review report 
 Part C – Publication of Stage 1 Peer Review reports 
 Part D – Monitoring of measures taken by assessed jurisdiction to improve the MAP regime (i.e. 
Stage 2 Peer Monitoring) 
9. A flowchart summary of the Stage 1 Peer Review and Stage 2 Peer Monitoring process is attached 
in Annex 2.A. and Annex 2.B. respectively and the model assessment schedule for conducting these 
reviews is attached in Annex 2.C.     
A. Obtaining inputs for the Stage 1 Peer Review 
10. This section of the note describes the mechanisms and procedures to obtain inputs for the Stage 
1 Peer Review of an assessed jurisdiction.

# Page 21
20        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Obtaining inputs from the assessed jurisdiction 
11. Each member of the FTA MAP Forum will be invited to designate a central point of contact for the 
Peer Review and Monitoring process , and to advise whether it wishes to c onduct its review in English or 
French. The peer review process will commence when the assessed jurisdiction receives a questionnaire 
(“the questionnaire”) in an electronic format from the Secretariat through this central point of contact.  
12. The questionnaire will be in a standard format covering each aspect of the elements, as described 
in the Terms of Reference. This will include requests for information on the jurisdiction’s legal framework 
for MAP (as  contained in tax treaties, domestic law and regulatio ns), the jurisdiction’s MAP programme 
guidance, how the jurisdiction’s MAP framework operates in practice, and relevant statistics. The standard 
form questionnaire may also be supplemented by jurisdiction -specific questions, for example regarding 
issues raised by peers and taxpayers.   
13. The information and materials provided by the assessed jurisdiction will be one of the main sources 
of information used in conducting the jurisdiction’s Stage 1 Peer R eview. Therefore, in response to the 
questionnaire, a juri sdiction should provide a detailed description of the relevant measures and actions, 
with analysis where appropriate, and including citations from relevant laws or other material. All relevant 
laws, regulations, guidelines and other relevant documents shou ld be available in the language of the 
review. A jurisdiction’s response to the questionnaire, and any documents or other materials provided by 
the jurisdiction, should be submitted to the Secretariat in an electronic format.  
14. The assessed jurisdiction should provide its response within a maximum of 4 weeks of receipt of 
the questionnaire from the Secretariat.  Where supplementary questions are sent to the assessed 
jurisdiction after receipt of the questionnaire, the assessed jurisdiction should also provide responses to 
these questions in a timely manner.  The time required for translation of documents by the assessed 
jurisdiction should be taken into account to ensure it meets this time frame.  
Obtaining input from the assessed jurisdiction’s peers  
15. An important element of the Peer Review and Monitoring process  is the opportunity for other 
members of the FTA MAP Forum that have a tax treaty with the assessed jurisdiction (“ peers”) to provide 
their input into the Forum’s assessment of the assessed jurisdiction’s compliance with the minimum 
standard. A questionnaire (“the peer questionnaire”) will be sent to members of the FTA MAP Forum in 
an electronic format when the review of a jurisdiction has commenced. This will be in a standard format 
and will invite jurisdictions that have a tax treaty with the assessed jurisdiction to provide comments on the 
assessed jurisdiction’s compliance with the elements of the minimum standard. A jurisdiction should notify 
the Secretariat if the peer review questionnaire should be sent to a person other than the designated point 
of contact referred to in paragraph 11 of this note.   
16. Jurisdictions should provide responses to the peer questionnaire within 4 weeks of its receipt from 
the Secretariat. These responses should be provided in English  or French and in an electronic format. 
While ensuring that taxpayer confidentiality is preserv ed, jurisdictions should aim to be specific in their 
responses and provide as much detail as possible to aid the Secretariat in understanding and evaluating 
any issues that have been identified. Where necessary, supplementary questions concerning issues raised 
in responses to the peer questionnaire may be sent to the assessed jurisdiction. Responses to the peer 
questionnaire will be made available to the assessed jurisdiction and the assessed jurisdiction should 
address any issues raised by its peers in its response to the Secretariat.  
Obtaining inputs from taxpayers6 
17. The main users of the MAP are the taxpayers and transparency and effectiveness of the assessed 
jurisdictions’ MAP regime helps provide certainty and predictability for taxpayers. In this regard, for the 
monitoring and peer review to be meaningful, it is important that taxpayers are able to provide input on

# Page 22
       21 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
their experience on the MAP process. Therefore taxpayers (e.g . individuals and corporations) and 
associations of taxpayers (e.g. business and industry associations) from all assessed jurisdictions will be 
invited to provide input focused on aspects of the minimum standard where taxpayers are in the best 
position to m ake contributions. The questionnaire to be used for that purpose will therefore centre on 
questions relating to access to MAP, clarity and availability of MAP guidance and the timely implementation 
of MAP agreements. The questionnaire will not request tech nical issues relating to specific cases and 
responses should not contain any information to which an assessed jurisdiction could not respond for 
reasons of taxpayer confidentiality. For the inputs to be considered by the assessed jurisdiction, 
respondents shall only submit their inputs based on the questions in the standard questionnaire and  
respondents will need to identify themselves in their response.    
18. The questionnaire itself will be available on the OECD website and written responses to  the 
questionnaire should be submitted to the OECD Secretariat. Written responses should be submitted no 
later than 4 weeks of a request for inputs being published on the OECD website.  The responses should 
be provided in English or French and in electronic format. The Secretariat will share the responses received 
from taxpayers (if any) with the assessed jurisdiction at the commencement of the peer review process of 
the assessed jurisdiction (see paragraph 11 above). The assessed jurisdiction, if it so wishes, could provide 
comments on any such responses and submit these comments to the Secretariat within a maximum of 
4 weeks. Thereafter, the Secretariat will share any responses received from taxpayers and any comments 
by the assessed jurisdiction with the members of the FTA MAP Forum.   
B. Drafting and approval of Stage 1 Peer Review report 
19. This section of the note describes the procedure starting from the drafting of the Stage 1 Peer 
Review report of an assessed jurisdiction to the approval of that report.  
Draft Stage 1 Peer Review report of an assessed jurisdiction 
20. Using the information provided by the assessed jurisdiction in the questionnaire, inputs from the 
peer questionnaires, responses from the assessed jurisdiction to peer and taxpayer inputs, the information 
in the assessed jurisdiction MAP profile which is published on a shared public platform and the statistics 
reported by the assessed jurisdiction pursuant to the agreed reporting framework, the Secretariat will 
prepare a draft Stage 1 Peer review report of th e assessed jurisdiction. The draft report will include 
information on the legal and administrative framework for the MAP regime of the assessed jurisdiction, the 
practical application of the framework, inputs from the peer questionnaires and the assessed jurisdiction’s 
response to all relevant inputs received on its review . It shall note all efforts made by the assessed 
jurisdiction to implement the minimum standard including the plans shared by the assessed jurisdiction to 
make legislative or procedural changes to implement the minimum standard taking into consideration that 
the assessed jurisdiction might not have fully implemented elements of the minimum standard given the 
time from its adoption to the time of its review. To assist the assessed jurisdiction in fully implementing the 
minimum standard, the draft report will thus identify and describe any shortcomings that exist in relation to 
the implementation of the minimum standard and provide recommendations as to how these shortcomings 
might be addressed. An outline of a draft Stage 1 Peer Review report is attached in Annex 2.D.    
21. The draft Stage 1 Peer Review report will be sent to the assessed jurisdiction and its peers that 
have raised issues on the assessed jurisdiction’s compliance with the minimum standard within 4 weeks 
of receipt of responses to the questionnaire and peer questionnaires. The  assessed jurisdiction should 
provide any written comments on the draft report within 6 weeks of receipt , i ncluding confirmation of 
whether it agrees with the outcomes of the review. The peer should inform the Secretariat whether the 
draft report addresses the issues raised by it in the peer questionnaire within 4 weeks of receipt. The 
Secretariat, the assessed  jurisdiction, and its peers shou ld take all reasonable steps to resolve any 
differences or disagreements regarding the draft report.

# Page 23
22        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Approval of the Stage 1 Peer Review report of an assessed jurisdiction by the FTA MAP 
Forum   
22. The draft Stage 1 Peer Review reports of all assessed jurisdictions will be circulated to the FTA 
MAP Forum at least 6 weeks prior to the Forum meeting , for approval under the written procedure . For 
each draft report, the Secretariat will inform the Forum as to whether the assessed jurisdiction and its peers 
that have raised issues on the assessed jurisdiction’s compliance with the minimum standard  agree with 
the outcomes of its review. Where a jurisdiction has failed to provide full responses to the questionnaire 
and any supplementary questions by the deadlines set out in the Assessment Methodology, and this has 
resulted in it not being possible to  conduct an effective review within the required time frame, this will be 
highlighted to the Forum.  
23. Members of the FTA MAP Forum should submit to the Secretariat any written comments or 
objections to a draft report within 3 weeks of receipt. Members should explain clearly the basis for their 
comments or objections so that the Secretariat has a proper appreciation of them. Where there are no 
written comments or objections to a draft report, that draft report will be considered to be approved by the 
FTA MAP Forum under written procedure. Where there are written comments or objections to a draft report, 
the draft report will be included on the agenda for the FTA MAP Forum meeting for discussion. At least 
1 week before the meeting, the Secretariat will send to the FTA MAP Forum a list of Stage 1 Peer Review 
reports that were approved by the FTA MAP Forum via written procedure, a compilation of the objections 
and written comments received and the Secretariat’s proposed response , and the amended draft reports 
incorporating the proposed changes for discussion at the FTA MAP Forum.  
24. At the FTA MAP Forum meeting, the Secretariat will present the key issues relating to each draft 
report on the agenda, including objections and comments received from members of the Forum,  and any 
changes that have been made to the draft report in order to take these into account. The assessed 
jurisdiction will also have the opportunity to raise any comments it has with respect to the outcomes of its 
review, and address any concerns or ques tions raised by other members of the Forum. The Forum will 
then discuss the issues raised with respect to the draft report , agree any changes that should be made  
and approve the revised report. In cases where the differences or disagreement on the draft re port arise 
from technical issues relating to the implementation of the minimum standard, the FTA MAP Forum shall, 
where necessary, request the appropriate Working Party of the CFA to provide its view on the issue under 
dispute for the FTA MAP Forum’s consideration in the discussion of the report. 
25. Following the approval of the Stage 1 Peer Review reports by the FTA MAP Forum, the Secretariat 
shall invite the FTA MAP Forum to approve the FTA MAP Forum Report  comprising three sections a s 
follows, for publication: 
 Section I which sets out the purpose and background to the monitoring and peer review process;  
 Section II which provides an executive summary on the main conclusions based on the Stage 1 
Peer Review reports on assessed jurisdictions as approved; and  
 Section III which contains the individual Stage 1 Peer Review reports on the assessed jurisdictions 
as approved.  
Any comments on the FTA MAP Forum Report should be limited to Section I and II of the report given that 
the individual reports in Section III were already approved by the FTA MAP Forum.  
C. Adoption of FTA MAP Forum Report on Stage 1 Peer Review reports by the CFA 
for publication  
26. Following the approval of the FTA MAP Forum Report by the FTA MAP Forum, it will be sent to 
the CFA7 within 1 week. In the exceptional circumstances that the FTA MAP Forum was unable to approve 
the report on an assessed jurisdiction, or where an effective review of an assessed jurisdiction was not

# Page 24
       23 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
possible (for example, where the assessed jurisdiction did not provide fu ll responses to the questionnaire 
and supplementary questions), this will be highlighted to the CFA together with an explanation on why the 
FTA MAP Forum has been unable to approve the report, or why an effective review of an assessed 
jurisdiction was not possible. 
27. The CFA will be invited to adopt the FTA MAP Forum Report for publication via written procedure. 
In the absence of any written objections within 2 weeks, the report is considered to be adopted. If there 
are written objections on the report, the Chair of the CFA shall decide via written procedure if the FTA MAP 
Forum should examine the objection and submit its proposal to the CFA for consideration via written 
procedure or the objection shall be discu ssed at the next meeting of the CFA . Following the adoption of 
the FTA MAP Report by the CFA, it shall be published as soon as possible.   
D. Monitoring of measures taken by assessed jurisdiction to improve the MAP 
regime (Stage 2 Peer Monitoring) 
28. The key objective of the monitoring and peer review of a jurisdiction’s compliance with the 
minimum standard is to help the jurisdiction identify areas where it can improve to achieve an efficient and 
effective MAP process. In this regard, it is important for both the FTA MAP Forum and the assessed 
jurisdiction to follow up on the recommendations in the Stage 1 Peer Review report to address the 
shortcomings identified and to publicly acknowledge progress made by the assessed jurisdiction. This 
section of the note describes the procedure for conducting the Stage 2  Peer Monitoring of an assessed 
jurisdiction. 
Approval of Stage 2 Peer Monitoring report of an assessed jurisdiction 
29. An assessed jurisdiction should within one year of the adoption of its Stage 1 Peer Review report 
by the CFA submit a detailed written report (“Update Report”) to the FTA MAP Forum of (i) the steps it 
has taken or is taking to address any shortcomings identified in its peer review report; and (ii) any plans or 
changes to its legislative or procedural framework relating to the implementation of the minimum standard. 
An assessed jurisdiction could also include in the Update Report any other plans or changes to the 
implementation of its MAP regime since its Stage 1 Peer Review report. The Update Report should be 
provided in English or French and in an electronic format.  
30. Members of the FTA MAP Forum should provide their comments on the Update Report provided 
by the assessed jurisdiction within 4 weeks from the receipt of that report. Comments provided by its peers 
shall be in English or French and in an electronic format and will be made available to the assessed 
jurisdiction and the assessed jurisdiction should address any issues raised by its peers in its response to 
the Secretariat within 4 weeks from receipt of the comments.  
31. Based on the Update Report submitted by the assessed jurisdiction, inputs from the peers, the 
statistics reported by the assessed jurisdiction pursuant to the agreed reporting framework, the Secretariat 
will revise the Stage 1 Peer review report of the assessed jurisdiction with a view to incorporate these 
updates in the Stage 2 Peer Monitoring report of the assessed jurisdiction.8 
32. Where comments were provided by the peers of the assessed jurisdiction, this draft Stage 2 Peer 
Monitoring report will be sent to the assessed jurisdiction and its peers that have raise d issues on the 
assessed jurisdiction’s compliance with the minimum standard within 4 weeks of receipt of the assessed 
jurisdiction’s response to comments from its peers. The assess ed jurisdiction should provide any written 
comments on the draft report within 6 weeks of receipt, including confirmation of whether it agrees with its 
draft Stage 2 Peer Monitoring report. The peer should inform the Secretariat whether the draft Stage 2 
Peer Monitoring report addresses the issues it raised within 4 weeks of receipt. The Secretariat, the 
assessed jurisdiction and its peers shou ld take all reasonable steps to resolve any differences or 
disagreements regarding the draft Stage 2 Peer Monitoring report.

# Page 25
24        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
33. Where there are no comments from the peers of the assessed jurisdiction, the draft Stage 2 Peer  
Monitoring report will be sent to the assessed jurisdiction within 8 weeks of receipt of the updates provided 
by the assessed jurisdiction to members of the FTA MAP Forum. The assessed jurisdiction should provide 
any written comments on the draft report within 6 weeks of receipt, including confirmation of whether it 
agrees with its draft Stage 2 Peer Monitoring report. The draft Stage 2 Peer Monitoring reports of the 
jurisdictions will be circulated to FTA MAP Forum at least 6 weeks prior to the Forum meeting, for approval 
under the written procedure following the same approval procedure as descri bed in paragraphs 22 to 24 
of this note.  
34. Following the approval of the Stage 2 Peer Monitoring reports by the FTA MAP Forum, the  
Secretariat shall circulate to the FTA MAP Forum a report comprising three sections (“ the FTA MAP 
Forum Update Report”) as follows: 
 Section I which sets out the purpose and background to the monitoring and peer review process;  
 Section II which provides an executive summary on the main conclusions based on the Stage 2 
Peer Monitoring reports on assessed jurisdictions as approved; and  
 Section III  which contains the individual Stage 2 Peer Monitoring reports on the assessed  
jurisdictions as approved.  
Any comments on the FTA MAP Forum Update Report should be limited to Section I and II of the report 
given that the individual Stage 2 Peer Monitoring reports in Section III were already approved by the FTA 
MAP Forum.  
Adoption of FTA MAP Forum Update Report on Stage 2 Peer Monitoring Reports by the 
CFA for publication 
35. Following the approval of the FTA MAP Forum Update Report by the FTA  MAP Forum, it will  be 
sent to the CFA within 1 week. In the exceptional circumstances that the FTA MAP Forum was unable to 
approve the Stage 2 Peer Monitoring report on an assessed jurisdiction, this will be highlighted to the CFA 
together with an explanation on why the FTA MAP Forum was unable to approve the report.  
36. The CFA will be invited to adopt the FTA MAP Forum Update Report for publication following the 
same approval procedure as described in paragraph 27  of this note. Following the adoption of the FTA 
MAP Forum Update Report by the CFA, it shall be published as soon as possible.    
E. Confidentiality  
37. It is important for members of the FTA MAP Forum and the CFA to recognise that no part of any 
report should be made publicly available in any form or manner prior to its publication. In addition, members 
of the FTA MAP Forum should treat all documents produced in the course of the review of any jurisdiction 
(e.g. documents describing a jurisdiction’s MAP regime, responses to the questionnaire, MAP stati stics 
and draft reports) as confidential and should not make them  publicly available, unless approval of their 
release has been obtained from the CFA. Strict respect for the confidentiality of th is work is essential to 
the credibility of the monitoring and peer review process. Any breach of confidentiality shall be brought to 
the attention of the FTA MAP Forum and the CFA for their decision on the most appropriate action to take. 
Continued Monitoring Process from 2023 onwards 
38. A review of the Assessment Methodology contained in this note in 2020 was foreseen at the time 
of development of this Assessment Methodology, as noted in paragraph 5 . The purpose of this review is 
to update the methodology in light of the experience in conducting peer monitoring, keepin g in mind the 
need for an Assessment Methodology which effectively improves the shortcomings identified in the peer

# Page 26
       25 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
review reports with the aim of ensuring an  effective MAP regime to benefit both governments and 
taxpayers. The below methodology reflects the agreement of the OECD/G20 Inclusive Framework on 
BEPS (the “Inclusive Framework”) on how monitoring of the Action 14 minimum standard should continue 
from 2023 onwards (“Continued Monitoring Process”), following the successful completion of the Peer 
Review and Monitoring process as described in Section II in 2022. As this section is intended to 
exhaustively cover the Continued Monitoring Process, unless explicitly referred to, it is clarified that 
paragraphs 1 to 34 woul d not be of relevance to this process.  
39. All Inclusive Framework member jurisdictions will work collectively to improve the effectiveness of 
the MAP . To assist members in improving the effectiveness of their MAP regime, every member’s 
compliance with the min imum standard will be reviewed by other members in the FTA MAP Forum, in 
accordance with an assessment schedule to be developed by the FTA MAP Forum. 
40. As noted in paragraph 7 of this note, the  Assessment Methodology applicable to the concluded 
Peer Review and Monitoring process under Section II allowed the deferral of peer review of a jurisdiction 
if it: (i) is a developing country (ii) is not an OECD/G20 country (iii) has not yet encountered a meaningful 
level of MAP requests and (iv) has not received feedb ack from other members of the FTA MAP Forum 
indicating that its MAP regime requires improvement. Accordingly, the peer reviews of 59 members of the 
Inclusive Framework were deferred under that process. 
41. However, the deferral of peer reviews is not provided for under the Continued Monitoring Process. 
Therefore, all Inclusive Framework member jurisdictions (whether previously peer reviewed or otherwise) 
shall be subject to monitoring under this process. Nevertheless, a simplified peer review process is put in 
place for jurisdictions that are considered not to have “meaningful MAP experience” 9 and that do not wish 
to undergo the full peer review process. 
42. A jurisdiction would be considered to have “meaningful MAP experience” on the basis of the 
following conditions: 
a. a threshold of ten MAP cases in its MAP end inventory as reported in its MAP Statistics over the 
three previous years on average is met by the jurisdiction, as detailed in paragraph 44; or  
b. feedback is received from other members of the FTA MAP Forum in dicating that the jurisdiction’s 
policy or practice concerning MAP requires improvement, as detailed in paragraph 45.   
43. Accordingly, a full peer review process would be limited to jurisdictions that wish to be subject to 
this process or have “meaningful MA P experience” based on these conditions. All remaining jurisdictions 
would be subject to a simplified peer review process. Jurisdictions that become eligible for the full peer 
review process based on the conditions for “meaningful MAP experience” defined a bove will remain 
ineligible for the simplified peer review process in all subsequent years.  
44. The first condition (see (a) above) for the “meaningful MAP experience” threshold is based on a 
jurisdiction’s MAP caseload  as reported in its annual MAP Statistics . The threshold of ten MAP cases in 
the end inventory over the previous three years on average ensures that only jurisdictions having 
meaningful practical experience with MAP would be subject to the full peer review. This average would be 
calculated by using the arithmetic mean of the number of all MAP cases10 remaining in the MAP inventory 
on 31 December [Year 11], on 31 December [Year -1] and 31 December [Year -2], without the rounding of 
decimal points upwards and thus , only averages of ten or above would be considered to meet this 
condition.  
45. The second condition  (see (b) above)  for the “meaningful MAP experience” trigger  is based on 
peer input. Where peers provide input to the FTA MAP Forum noting that a jurisdiction’s policy or practice 
with respect to MAP requires further improvement, such input would be discussed and considered by the 
FTA MAP Forum, which would then decide whether the jurisdiction should be subject to the full peer review 
process. The peer input que stionnaire developed for input in the Peer Review and Monitoring process

# Page 27
26        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
under Section II (and referred to in Section II(A)(ii)) would be used for the purpose of determining whether 
the second condition has been met.  
46. A call for input would be released in January 2023 providing a window of time within which peers 
may provide input in electronic form on jurisdictions that do not meet the first condition for “meaningful 
MAP experience”, measured on the basis of the 2019 -2021 MAP Statistics. Based on input rec eived, the 
FTA MAP Forum would decide whether a jurisdiction would qualify for the simplified peer review process 
or the full peer review process and consequently, whether it should be included in the first full peer review 
cycle starting in 2024 as descri bed under Section III(B) below. Similarly, for jurisdictions that join the 
Inclusive Framework in 2023 and onwards that do not meet the first condition, a call for input would be 
released following each jurisdiction’s date of joining providing a window of time within which peers may 
provide input in electronic form. Based on input received, the FTA MAP Forum would decide whether a 
new Inclusive Framework member jurisdiction would qualify for the simplified peer review process or the 
full peer review process and decide the appropriate way to accommodate them in the existing peer review 
process. 
47. Peers would also be allowed to provide input in electronic form on the jurisdictions initially included 
in the simplified peer review process at any later point of time, to allow the MAP Forum to consider whether 
these jurisdictions should be moved to the full peer review process. If peers provide input with respect to 
a jurisdiction or where a jurisdiction meets the first condition based on MAP cases at a later stage, the FTA 
MAP Forum would decide the appropriate way to move such jurisdiction from the simplified peer review 
process to the full peer review process.   
48. Jurisdictions that have not filed MAP Statistics for any or all of the years concerning condition (a) 
above would still be eligible for the simplified peer review process so long as no peer input is received with 
respect to their policy or practice concerning MAP as under condition (b) and under the condition that peers 
do not report having ten or more MAP cases with these jurisdictions. However, it would not be possible to 
determine whether jurisdictions that do not file MAP Statistics met the first condition for “meaningful MAP 
experience” and the filing of MAP Statistics is required under the Action 14 minimum standard. Therefore, 
jurisdictions that have not filed MAP Statistics for the last reporting year being considered for stage 2 of 
their simplified peer review process or fail to do so for any future year would be subject to the full peer 
review proces s in the following full peer review cycle as described under Section III(B), where their 
compliance with the Action 14 minimum standard in general may be reviewed more closely by the FTA 
MAP Forum. 
49. The procedures to be followed in the simplified peer revie w process and the full peer review 
process are described in detail below. A flowchart summary showing the collection of peer input for the 
simplified peer review process is attached in Annex 2.E. In addition, a flowchart summary of the simplified 
peer review process and the full peer review process for the Continued Monitoring Process  are attached 
in Annex 2.F. and Annex 2.G. respectively and the model assessment schedule s for conducting these 
reviews are attached in Annex 2.H. and Annex 2.I. respectively.    
A. Simplified peer review process 
50. The simplified peer review process would be limited to a consideration of a jurisdiction’s tax treaty 
network, MAP profile, MAP guidance, compliance with the MAP Statistics Reporting Framework and, 
where applicable, practical application of the minimum standard, with the aim of assisting the jurisdictions 
in setting up a more robust MAP programme for future MAP cases. The simplified peer review process 
would commence from 2023 onwards and would follow a simplified forma t. 
51. The simplified peer review process will be conducted and peer review reports will be published in 
two stages (stage 1 and stage 2). Stage 1 involves the review of the assessed jurisdiction’s implementation 
of the minimum standard based on the jurisdiction’s legal framework for MAP and the application of this

# Page 28
       27 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
framework in practice (“Stage 1 Peer Review”). Stage 2 involves the review of the measures taken by the 
assessed jurisdiction to address any shortcomings identified in its Stage 1 Peer Revi ew (“Stage 2 Peer 
Monitoring”).  
52. During the Stage 1 Peer Review and Stage 2 Peer Monitoring, inputs would be obtained from the 
assessed jurisdictions as well as the assessed jurisdiction’s peers in line with the process followed in 
Section II(A)(i) and II( A)(ii) respectively. However, inputs obtained from peers indicating that such 
jurisdiction’s policy or practice concerning MAP requires improvement and accepted by the FTA MAP 
Forum as described in paragraph 45 would lead to the FTA MAP Forum considering h ow to move the 
assessed jurisdiction to a full  peer review process . Therefore, only other inputs would be considered as 
part of the simplified peer review process.  
53. There would be no formal mechanism for taxpayer input in the simplified peer review process . 
Nevertheless, taxpayers that face difficulties in their interactions with one competent authority can always 
approach the other competent authority concerned. The competent authority that is approached by a 
taxpayer can also always include the input provided by the taxpayer in its peer input with respect to an 
assessed jurisdiction where it considers this relevant, which would be taken into account in the peer review 
process.12 
54. The Stage 1 Peer Review process would follow the Drafting and Approval process described in 
Section II(B) and the Adoption process described in Section II(C), including the timelines prescribed, as 
well as the confidentiality obligations highlighted in Section II(E), except the following:  
a. The Stage 1 Peer Review under the simplified peer review process would follow a simplified format 
as contained in Annex 2.J. and would be focused on ensuring that the assessed jurisdiction can  
set up a more robust MAP programme to handle and resolve future MAP cases  efficiently, 
effectively and in a timely manner where needed. 
b. It is clarified that references to the CFA are seen to mean the Inclusive Framework in connection 
with the adoption of the reports prior to publication. 
55. The Stage 2 Peer Monitoring process would commence two years after the date of approval of the 
Stage 1 Peer Review report. The Stage 2 Peer Monitoring process would follow the process described in 
Section II(D), including the timelines prescribed, and the confidentiality obligations highlighted in Section 
II(E) except that it is clarified that references to the CFA is seen to mean the Inclusive Framework in 
connection with the adoption of the reports prior to publication. 
56. Following the approval of the Stage 2 Peer Monitoring report , where any recommendations 
connected to elements of the Terms of Reference  other than those connected to changing existing tax 
treaties13  are remaining in a report, the assessed jurisdiction shall continue to provide update reports (as 
discussed under Section II(D)) to the FTA MAP Forum once every three years starting from the date of the 
approval of the Stage 2 Peer Monitoring report by the Inclusive Framework. This update report would be 
a detailed written report by the assessed jurisdiction on  (i) the steps it has taken or is taking to address 
shortcomings identified in its peer review report; and (ii) any plans or changes to its legislative or procedural 
framework relating to the implementation of the minimum standard. An assessed jurisdiction could also 
include in the update report any other plans or changes to the implementation of its MAP regime since its 
Stage 1 Peer Review report. The update report should be provided in English or French and in an electronic 
format. Peers would be invited to provide inputs on the update report, as under paragraph 52. 
57. If there are no recommendations  other than those connected to changing existing tax treaties  
remaining in the Stage 2 Peer Monitoring report  and where peers confirm or provide no additional input 
with respect to an update report , there would be no further review of a n assessed jurisdiction until it is 
found to meet one of the conditions for “meaningful MAP experience” described above.

# Page 29
28        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
58. In the event that the Action 14 minimum standard or Terms of Reference are revised in the future, 
the simplified peer review process would be reviewed by the FTA MAP Forum to ensure that it aligns with 
the revisions. 
B. Full peer review process 
59. For all remaining members of the Inclusive Framework i.e. members that do not qualify for the 
“simplified peer review proces s” described above or wish to be subject to a full peer review (“ qualifying 
jurisdictions”), a full peer review would be conducted in a continuing, concise and effective manner. The 
full peer review process would commence from 2024 onwards. 
60. The full peer r eview process would be conducted in cycles with each cycle constituting a three 
year period during which all qualifying jurisdictions would be peer reviewed. Once each cycle of three years 
of peer reviews is completed, a gap year would be provided to allow the FTA MAP Forum to focus on other 
areas. Therefore, each qualifying jurisdiction would be subject to the full peer review process once every 
four years, with around one-third of all qualifying jurisdictions being reviewed in the first, second and third 
year respectively and the fourth year being a gap year.14 
61. For the full peer review process, inputs would be obtained from the assessed jurisdictions as well 
as the assessed jurisdiction’s peers in line with the process followed in Section II(A)(i) and II(A) (ii) 
respectively.  
62. There would  be no formal mechanism for taxpayer input in the full peer review process. 
Nevertheless, taxpayers that face difficulties in their interactions with one competent authority can always 
approach the other competent authority c oncerned. The competent authority that is approached by a 
taxpayer can also always include the input provided by the taxpayer in its peer input with respect to an 
assessed jurisdiction where it considers this relevant, which would be taken into account in the peer review 
process.15 
63. The full peer review process would follow the process described in Section II(D), including the 
timelines prescribed, and the confidentiality obligations highlighted in Section II(E) except that:  
a. Update reports would be submitted by each assessed jurisdiction based on deadlines connected 
to the organisation of the full peer review cycles, to ensure that the peer reviews of all jurisdictions 
are completed at the end of each cycle. 
b. An assessed jurisdiction would, in its update report , identify the steps it has taken or is taking to 
address any shortcomings identified in its previously published  peer review report and any plans 
or changes to its legislative or procedural framework relating to the implementation of the minimum 
standard. An assessed jurisdiction could also include in the report any other plans or changes to 
the implementation of its MAP regime since its previously published peer review report. 
c. The full peer review process would lead to the drafting, adoption and publicati on of fresh Peer 
Monitoring Reports in each cycle, instead of Stage 2 Peer Monitoring reports that updated Stage 1 
peer review reports under the Peer Review and Monitoring process under Section II. 
d. It is clarified that references to the CFA are seen to mean the Inclusive Framework in connection 
with the adoption of the reports prior to publication. 
64. It is also acknowledged that a full peer review process may not be necessary going forward for 
jurisdictions that are already fully in line with the Action 14  minimum standard, with no recommendations 
remaining in their last published peer review report . Such jurisdictions are required to  provide update 
reports as noted above with respect to the relevant full peer review cycle . However, subject to no input 
showing policy/practices that require improvement being provided by peers with respect to the update 
report, no full peer review report would be published for such jurisdictions in the concerned full peer review 
cycle.

# Page 30
       29 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
65. The FTA MAP Forum shall ensure that the jurisdictions being reviewed in each year would include 
jurisdictions with varying experience in MAP to minimise administrative workload for peers. The FTA MAP 
Forum shall also ensure that jurisdictions that are undergoing or have undergone the simplified peer review 
process that qualify for the full peer review process are then moved into the full peer review process in a 
manner that allows them sufficient time to prepare.  
66. In the event that the Action 14 minimum standard or Terms of Reference are revised in the future, 
the full peer review process would be reviewed by the FTA MAP Forum to ensure that it aligns with the 
revisions. If no such revisions are made by the time two full three -year peer review cycles are completed, 
the FTA MAP Forum will consider a t that time  whether the full peer review process is working well or 
requires review in the interest of adding further simplification and efficiency measures , including whether 
full peer review reports may be replaced with update reports for more jurisdicti ons in the future. 
Reference 
 
OECD (2015), Making Dispute Resolution Mechanisms More Effective, Action 14 - 2015 Final 
Report, OECD/G20 Base Erosion and Profit Shifting Project, OECD Publishing, Paris, 
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264241633-en. 
[1] 
 
Notes

# Page 31
30        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
1 Available at www.oecd.org/tax/beps-2015-final-reports.htm.  
2 For the purposes of this note, all references to members of the FTA MAP Forum should be read to mean members 
of the FTA MAP Forum that have committed to the implementation of the Action 14 minimum standard. 
3 The methodology proposed in this note would apply to reviews conducted in the context of the Inclusive Framework 
for BEPS Implementation. The modalities for reviews of countries and jurisdictions of relevance, as identified by the 
CFA, which have not joined the Inclusive Framework, will be agreed in due course by the CFA. 
4 For the purposes of this note, non-members of the FTA MAP Forum refer to jurisdictions, including existing members 
of the FTA MAP Forum, that have not committed to the implementation of the Action 14 minimum standard. 
5 Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China (People’s Republic of), Colombia, Czech 
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, 
Italy, Japan, Korea, Latvia, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Saudi 
Arabia, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom and United 
States.   
6 Footnote by India: “India consistently opposed the  direct participation of taxpayers in the Peer Review process on 
the principles that, (i) this was not part of the final report on Action 14 and (ii) taxpayers are not peers of sovereign 
countries. However, in a spirit of compromise, India agreed for the i nclusion of taxpayers inputs as mentioned in this 
document.” 
7 Please see paragraph 7 above on the inclusive framework to broaden the participation in the OECD/G20 BEPS 
Project. 
8 For an assessed jurisdiction that did not submit an Update Report because th ere are no shortcomings identified in 
its Stage 1 Peer Review report and no changes to its legislative or procedural framework relating to the implementation 
of the minimum standard, its Stage 2 Peer Monitoring report would be updated with the statistics r eported by the 
assessed jurisdiction pursuant to the agreed reporting framework. 
9 Please note that the reference to “meaningful MAP experience” in this document is in reference to the defined term 
that covers the conditions described in paragraph 42 and d oes not intend to objectively define as to when MAP 
experience is meaningful in general. 
10 All MAP cases would be counted for this calculation, irrespective of the year of introduction of the MAP request or 
categorisation done for the purposes of the MAP Statistics. 
11 “Year” refers to the latest available year of MAP Statistics published on the OECD website. 
12 Please see footnote 6 in this regard where India’s concerns with respect to the consideration of taxpayer input in 
the peer review process have been reflected. 
13 The elements of the Terms of Reference connected to tax treaties are elements A.1, B.1, B.7, C.1 and D.3. 
14 For example, if 52 jurisdictions qualify for the full peer review process, Year 1 would involve the peer reviews of 18 
jurisdictions that would be completed by the end of the year; and Year 2 as well as Year 3 would similarly involve the 
peer reviews of 17 jurisdictions respectively, following which Year 4 would be a gap year . The same set of jurisdictions 
would be reviewed again in Years 5, 6 and 7 respectively with Year 8 being a gap year and this would continue. 
15 Please see footnote 6 in this regard where India’s concerns with respect to the consideration of taxpayer input in 
the peer review process have been reflected.

# Page 32
       31 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Annex 2.A. Summary of Stage 1 Peer Review 
process 
Figure 1. Information and input gathering 
 
Source: OECD 
Figure 2. Discussion and approval of an assessed jurisdiction’s Stage 1 Peer Review report by the 
FTA MAP Forum 
 
Source: OECD 
Members of 
FTA MAP ForumAssessed Jurisdiction
Questionnaire Response to 
Questionnaire
Secretariat
Peer
Input
Taxpayers
QuestionnairePeer
Questionnaire
Taxpayer 
Input
- MAP Profile
- Statistics
- Research 
materials
No Yes
YesNo
Approval by FTA MAP Forum 
under written procedure
Report included in 
the FTA MAP 
Forum Report 
Report to be discussed at the 
FTA MAP Forum meeting 
Explanation 
included in the 
FTA MAP 
Forum Report 
Report 
Approved?
Secretariat
Draft Stage 1 Peer 
Review Report of 
Assessed 
Jurisdiction 
Report 
Approved
?

# Page 33
32        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Figure 3. Adoption of FTA MAP Forum report on Stage 1 Peer Reviews by the CFA for publication 
 
Source: OECD 
No Yes Publication of                    
FTA MAP Forum 
Report 
Report 
Adopted?
Chair of the CFA to request FTA 
MAP Forum to examine the objection 
or to discuss the objection at the 
meeting of the CFA 
The CFA for adoption of Report for 
publication under written procedureSecretariat
Approved FTA MAP 
Forum Report

# Page 34
       33 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Annex 2.B. Summary of Stage 2 Peer Monitoring 
process 
Figure 4. Discussion and approval of an assessed jurisdiction’s Stage 2 Peer Monitoring report by 
the FTA MAP Forum 
 
Source: OECD 
Figure 5. Adoption of FTA MAP Forum Update report on Stage 2 Peer Monitoring by the CFA for 
ublication 
 
Source: OECD 
Draft Stage 2 Peer 
Monitoring Report of 
Assessed Jurisdiction 
Secretariat
Approval by FTA MAP Forum 
under written procedure
No Yes
YesNo
Report included 
in the FTA MAP 
Forum Update 
Report 
Report to be discussed at 
the FTA MAP Forum 
meeting 
Explanation 
included in the 
FTA MAP 
Forum Update 
Report
Report 
Approved
?
Report 
Approved
?
Peer input 
on Update 
Report
Update Report 
by Assessed 
Jurisdiction
- MAP Profile
- Statistics
- Research materials
No Yes
Publication of                    
FTA MAP Forum 
Update Report 
Report 
Adopted?
Chair of the CFA to request FTA MAP 
Forum to examine the objection or to 
discuss the objection at the meeting of 
the CFA 
The CFA for adoption of Report 
for publication under written 
procedure
Secretariat
Approved FTA MAP 
Forum Update Report

# Page 35
34        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Annex 2.C. Model assessment schedules for approval of peer review reports 
by the FTA MAP Forum 
Figure 6. Stage 1 Peer Review 
 
Source: OECD 
Minimum 6 weeks
(i) response from 
assessed 
jurisdiction 
(ii) peer inputs 
Secretariat sends 
(i) questionnaire & 
taxpayer inputs to 
assessed 
jurisdiction; and (ii) 
peer questionnaire 
to FTA MAP Forum
Secretariat 
sends draft 
report to 
assessed 
jurisdiction and 
peers that have 
provided input
Assessed 
jurisdiction 
provides 
comments 
Secretariat sends 
draft report to 
FTA MAP Forum 
for approval
Discussion 
at FTA MAP 
Forum 
meeting      
(if 
necessary)
FTA MAP Forum 
approves report 
via written 
procedure or 
comments / 
objects to the 
report
Peers 
provide 
comments 
6 weeks
Secretariat sends 
comments / objections 
received, its proposed 
responses and 
amended draft report (if 
necessary) to FTA MAP 
Forum 
4 weeks 4 weeks 4 weeks 2 weeks as soon as possible 3 weeks as soon as possible minimum 1 week

# Page 36
       35 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Figure 7. Stage 2 Peer Monitoring 
 
Source: OECD 
8 weeks if no comments received from 
peers
Minimum 6 weeks
Assessed jurisdiction 
submits Update 
Report to FTA MAP 
Forum within 1 year 
of CFA’s adoption of 
its Stage 1 Peer 
Review report 
Members of 
FTA MAP 
Forum 
provide 
comments
Secretariat sends 
draft report to 
assessed 
jurisdiction and 
peers that have 
provided inputs
Assessed 
jurisdiction 
comments 
on peer 
inputs
Assessed 
jurisdiction 
provides 
comments
Secretariat 
sends draft 
report to FTA 
MAP Forum for 
approval
FTA MAP Forum 
approves report via 
written procedure or 
comments / objects 
to the report
Secretariat sends 
comments / objections 
received, its proposed 
responses and 
amended draft report (if 
necessary) to FTA MAP 
Forum 
Discussion at 
FTA MAP 
Forum 
meeting (if 
necessary)
Peers 
provide 
comments
6 weeks
4 weeks 4 weeks 4 weeks 4 weeks 2 weeks as soon as possible 3 weeks as soon as possible minimum 1 week

# Page 37
36        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Annex 2.D. Outline of Stage 1 Peer Review report 
This annex provides a draft outline for the Stage 1 Peer Review reports for approval by the FTA MAP 
Forum and subsequently for adoption by the CFA for publication. Drafts reports should as much as possible 
follow a similar presentation and have a similar length and level of details, even though each report will be 
tailored to the individual jurisdiction being assessed.  
Executive Summary (1-2 pages) 
The executive summary should: 
(i) state the purpose of the report, i.e. (a) the report summarises the jurisdiction’s legal and 
regularly framework for resolving tax treaty related disputes as well as the practical 
implementation of that framework; (b) examines the jurisdiction’s framework against the 
minimum standard set out in the Te rms of Reference to identify areas of improvement 
so that the jurisdiction can improve its MAP regime with the objective of resolving tax 
treaty-related disputes in a timely, effective and efficient manner;   
(ii) summarise the mechanisms available in the jurisdiction to resolve tax treaty -related 
disputes (e.g. number of tax treaties, arbitration provisions in tax treaties, EU arbitration 
convention);  
(iii)  summarise the outcome of the reviews of the jurisdiction’s compliance with the 
minimum standard in each of the following areas – preventing disputes; availability and 
access to MAP; resolution of MAP cases; and implementation of MAP agreements.  
(iv) describe the follow up actions required from the assessed jurisdiction.  
 
Introduction (2-3 pages) 
This section should provide: 
(i) the basis for the review, including the methodology used for the review and the 
information that is used to conduct the review (e.g. response from questionnaire , peer 
inputs, responses to peer and  taxpayers’ inputs, informatio n available in the 
jurisdiction’s MAP profile, MAP statistics from reporting template, information published 
by the jurisdiction);  
(ii) further information on the mechanisms available in the jurisdiction to resolve tax treaty-
related disputes (e.g. network of t ax treaties, arbitration provisions in specific tax 
treaties, EU arbitration convention); 
(iii)  recent developments relating to dispute resolution mechanism (e.g. number of tax 
treaties updated to incorporate elements of the minimum standard, number  of tax 
treaties under negotiation, signatory of the multilateral instrument with specific 
reference to the provisions relating to Article 25 (Mutual Agreement Procedure), 
administrative measures taken to improve dispute resolution mechanism).

# Page 38
       37 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Compliance with the minimum standard (15-20 pages) 
This section comprises four sub-sections – (A) Preventing Disputes; (B) Availability and Access to MAP; 
(C) Resolution of MAP Cases; and (D) Implementation of MAP Agreements. Each of the sub -sections 
will be divided into elements of the minimum standard as described in the Terms of Reference.  
The report shall note all efforts made by the assessed jurisdiction to implement the minimum standard 
including the plans shared by the assessed jurisdiction to make legislative or procedural changes to 
implement the minimum standard taking into consideration that the assessed jurisdiction might not have 
fully implemented elements of the minimum standard given the time from its adoption to the time of its 
review. For each of the element of the minimum standard, the report should also note the inputs from 
peers and the assessed jurisdiction’s response to all relevant inputs received, if any.  
An analysis of the jurisdiction’s compliance with each element of the minimum standard should be made. 
Any shortcomings that exist in relation to the implementation of the element of the minimum standard 
should be identified in the report and recommendations as to how these shortcomings might be 
addressed should also be made in the report.  For each of the element, a summary shall be made as 
follows: 
Areas for Improvement Recommendations

# Page 39
38        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Annex 2.E. Summary of peer input collection in 
the simplified peer review process (Continued 
Monitoring) 
Figure 8. Start of the simplified peer review process – January 2023/New Inclusive Framework 
members 
 
Source: OECD 
Figure 9. After the simplified peer review process has commenced for a jurisdiction 
 
Source: OECD 
Secretariat
Call for input
X weeks for peer input
Peers
All jurisdictions with <10 
MAP cases – 2019-
21/20XY-(XY+2) Statistics
No peer input
Simplified 
peer review 
MAP Forum 
view
Peer input
Forum decision – input not 
requiring improvement
Full peer 
review 
Forum decision – input requiring 
improvement
Peers
Input
Any time
Secretariat
Simplified peer 
review 
MAP Forum 
view
Forum decision – input not requiring 
improvement
Full peer 
review 
Forum decision – input requiring 
improvement
Statistics over previous 3 years 
- >10 MAP cases
Forum decision – how to continue 
simplified peer review/move to full peer 
review

# Page 40
       39 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Annex 2.F. Summary of simplified peer review 
process (Continued Monitoring) 
Figure 10. Information and input gathering 
 
Source: OECD 
Figure 11. Discussion and approval of an assessed jurisdiction’s Stage 1 Peer Review report by the 
FTA MAP Forum 
 
Source: OECD 
Members of 
FTA MAP ForumAssessed Jurisdiction
Questionnaire Response to 
Questionnaire
Secretariat
Peer
Input
Taxpayers
Peer
Questionnaire
- MAP Profile
- Statistics
- Research materials
No Yes
YesNo
Approval by FTA MAP Forum 
under written procedure
Report included in 
the FTA MAP 
Forum Report 
Report to be discussed at the 
FTA MAP Forum meeting 
Explanation 
included in the 
FTA MAP Forum 
Report 
Report 
Approved?
Secretariat
Draft Stage 1 Peer 
Review Report of 
Assessed 
Jurisdiction 
Report 
Approved?

# Page 41
40        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Figure 12. Adoption of Stage 1 Peer Review report by the Inclusive Framework (IF) for publication 
 
Source: OECD  
Figure 13. Discussion and approval of an assessed jurisdiction’s Stage 2 Peer Monitoring report by 
the FTA MAP Forum 
 
Source: OECD 
Figure 14. Adoption of Stage 2 Peer Monitoring Report by the IF for Publication 
 
Source: OECD 
No Yes Publication of                    
Report 
Report 
Adopted?
Chair(s) of the IF to request FTA MAP 
Forum to examine the objection or to 
discuss the objection at the meeting of 
the IF 
The IF for adoption of Report for 
publication under written procedureSecretariat
Approved FTA MAP 
Forum Report 
Draft Stage 2 Peer 
Monitoring Report of 
Assessed Jurisdiction 
Secretariat
Approval by FTA MAP Forum 
under written procedure
No Yes
YesNo
Report included 
in the FTA MAP 
Forum Report 
Report to be discussed at 
the FTA MAP Forum 
meeting 
Explanation 
included in the 
FTA MAP 
Forum Report
Report 
Approved?
Report 
Approved?
Peer input 
on Update 
Report
Update Report 
by Assessed 
Jurisdiction
- MAP Profile
- Statistics
- Research materials
No Yes Publication of                    
Report 
Report 
Adopted?
Chair(s) of the IF to request FTA 
MAP Forum to examine the 
objection or to discuss the objection 
at the meeting of the IF 
The IF for adoption of Report for 
publication under written 
procedure
Secretariat
Approved FTA MAP 
Forum Report

# Page 42
       41 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Annex 2.G. Summary of the full peer review 
process (Continued Monitoring) 
Figure 15. Information and input gathering 
 
Source: OECD 
Figure 16. Discussion and approval of an assessed jurisdiction’s peer review report by the FTA 
MAP Forum 
 
Source: OECD 
Members of 
FTA MAP Forum
Assessed Jurisdiction
Questionnaire Response to 
Questionnaire
Secretariat
Peer
Input
Taxpayers
Peer
Questionnaire
- MAP Profile
- Statistics
- Research materials
Draft Peer Review 
Report of Assessed 
Jurisdiction 
Secretariat
Approval by FTA MAP Forum 
under written procedure
No Yes
YesNo
Report included 
in the FTA MAP 
Forum Report 
Report to be discussed at 
the FTA MAP Forum 
meeting 
Explanation 
included in the 
FTA MAP 
Forum Report
Report 
Approved?
Report 
Approved?
Peer input 
on Update 
Report
Update Report 
by Assessed 
Jurisdiction
- MAP Profile
- Statistics
- Research materials

# Page 43
42        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Figure 17. Adoption of Peer Review Report by the IF for Publication 
 
Source: OECD 
No Yes Publication of                    
Report 
Report 
Adopted?
Chair(s) of the IF to request FTA 
MAP Forum to examine the 
objection or to discuss the objection 
at the meeting of the IF 
The IF for adoption of Report for 
publication under written 
procedure
Secretariat
Approved FTA MAP 
Forum Report

# Page 44
       43 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Annex 2.H. Model assessment schedules for approval of peer review reports 
by the FTA MAP Forum in the simplified peer review process (Continued 
Monitoring) 
Figure 18. Simplified peer review process - Stage 1 Peer Review (Continued Monitoring) 
 
Source: OECD 
Minimum 6 weeks
(i) response from 
assessed 
jurisdiction 
(ii) peer inputs 
Secretariat sends 
(i) questionnaire & 
taxpayer inputs to 
assessed 
jurisdiction; and (ii) 
peer questionnaire 
to FTA MAP Forum
Secretariat 
sends draft 
report to 
assessed 
jurisdiction and 
peers that have 
provided input
Assessed 
jurisdiction 
provides 
comments 
Secretariat sends 
draft report to 
FTA MAP Forum 
for approval
Discussion 
at FTA MAP 
Forum 
meeting      
(if 
necessary)
FTA MAP Forum 
approves report 
via written 
procedure or 
comments / 
objects to the 
report
Peers 
provide 
comments 
6 weeks
Secretariat sends 
comments / objections 
received, its proposed 
responses and 
amended draft report (if 
necessary) to FTA MAP 
Forum 
4 weeks 4 weeks 4 weeks 2 weeks as soon as possible 3 weeks as soon as possible minimum 1 week

# Page 45
44        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Figure 19. Simplified peer review process - Stage 2 Peer Monitoring (Continued Monitoring) 
 
Source: OECD 
8 weeks if no comments received from 
peers
Minimum 6 weeks
Assessed jurisdiction 
submits Update 
Report to FTA MAP 
Forum within 2 years 
of IF’s adoption of its 
Stage 1 Peer Review 
report 
Members of 
FTA MAP 
Forum 
provide 
comments
Secretariat sends 
draft report to 
assessed 
jurisdiction and 
peers that have 
provided inputs
Assessed 
jurisdiction 
comments 
on peer 
inputs
Assessed 
jurisdiction 
provides 
comments
Secretariat 
sends draft 
report to FTA 
MAP Forum for 
approval
FTA MAP Forum 
approves report via 
written procedure or 
comments / objects 
to the report
Secretariat sends 
comments / objections 
received, its proposed 
responses and 
amended draft report (if 
necessary) to FTA MAP 
Forum 
Discussion at 
FTA MAP 
Forum 
meeting (if 
necessary)
Peers 
provide 
comments
6 weeks
4 weeks 4 weeks 4 weeks 4 weeks 2 weeks as soon as possible 3 weeks as soon as possible minimum 1 week

# Page 46
       45 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Annex 2.I. Model assessment schedules for approval of peer review reports 
by the FTA MAP Forum in the full peer review process (Continued 
Monitoring) 
Figure 20. Full Peer Review Process (Continued Monitoring) 
 
Source: OECD 
8 weeks if no comments received from 
peers
Minimum 6 weeks
Assessed 
jurisdiction 
submits Update 
Report to FTA 
MAP Forum 
Members of FTA 
MAP Forum 
provide 
comments
Secretariat sends 
draft report to 
assessed 
jurisdiction and 
peers that have 
provided inputs
Assessed 
jurisdiction 
comments 
on peer 
inputs
Assessed 
jurisdiction 
provides 
comments
Secretariat 
sends draft 
report to 
FTA MAP 
Forum for 
approval
FTA MAP Forum 
approves report via 
written procedure or 
comments / objects 
to the report
Secretariat sends 
comments / objections 
received, its proposed 
responses and 
amended draft report (if 
necessary) to FTA 
MAP Forum 
Discussion at 
FTA MAP 
Forum 
meeting (if 
necessary)
Peers 
provide 
comments
6 weeks
4 weeks 4 weeks 4 weeks 4 weeks 2 weeks as soon as possible 3 weeks as soon as possible minimum 1 week

# Page 47
46        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Annex 2.J. Outline of Stage 1 simplified peer 
review report (Continued Monitoring) 
1. Executive summary 
2. Tax treaty network  
 Overview of tax treaty network: Number of treaties entered into (jurisdictions covered/in force), 
whether the Multilateral Instrument has been signed/ratified/in force 
 A table showing the overall tax treaty network of the jurisdiction, including the impact of the 
Multilateral Instrument in green (the inclusion of Article 9(2) is shown for information purposes 
only). For example: 
  Article 25(1)  
OECD MTC 
Article 25(2)  
OECD MTC 
Article 25(3) 
OECD MTC 
Article 
9(2)  
OECD 
MTC 
Treaty 1st 
sentence 
2nd 
sentence 
1st 
sentence 
2nd 
sentence 
1st 
sentence 
2nd 
sentence 
 
1 Treaty Partner        
2 Treaty Partner        
3 Treaty Partner        
4 Treaty Partner     X   
5 Treaty Partner        
6 Treaty Partner      X  
 Actions taken/expected by the jurisdiction regarding treaties that are not in line with the Action 14 
minimum standard 
 Recommendations 
3. MAP guidance and MAP profile 
MAP guidance 
 Whether the jurisdiction has MAP guidance and if yes, place of publication, date of last update  
 Contents of the MAP guidance shown in a simplified tabular form. For example:  
Chapter Content 
1. Introduction  The purpose of the MAP guidance 
 XXX

# Page 48
       47 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
 List of information and documentation required for a MAP request  
 Recommendations 
MAP profile 
 Whether the jurisdiction has published a MAP profile and if yes, date of last update  
 Brief evaluation if the MAP profile is complete and whether contents of MAP profile reflect reported 
practice 
 Recommendations 
4. MAP statistics 
 Whether the jurisdiction has submitted MAP statistics on time and has done matching of MAP 
statistics with treaty partners 
 Where the jurisdiction is involved in MAP cases, whether such juri sdiction has closed MAP cases 
within the targeted average timeframe of 24 months and whether the MAP statistics suggest that 
the jurisdiction has sufficient resources in its competent authority function  
 Recommendations 
5. Practical application of the Action 14 minimum standard 
 A brief review of the jurisdiction’s policy regarding MAP from the MAP guidance/MAP profile (in 
general as well as tailored to specific elements of the Terms of Reference  concerning transfer 
pricing cases, anti-abuse cases, audit settlements etc.) along with any practical application based 
on the jurisdiction’s reporting and the peer input received to see if policy/practice in general are in 
line with the Action 14 minimum standard 
 Recommendations

# Page 49
48        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Introduction 
1. The Report on Action 14: Making Dispute Resolution Mechanisms More Effective  (“the 2015 
Action 14 Report ”) (OECD, 2015[1]) was approved by the OECD Committee of Fiscal Affairs (“ CFA”) in 
September, presented to the OECD Council and endorsed by the G20 Finance Ministers on 8 October 
2015. This Report contained a commitment by countries engaged in the work to the implementation of a 
minimum standard to ensure that they resolve treaty -related disputes in a timely, effective and efficient 
manner and to have their compliance with the minimum standard reviewed by their peers – i.e. the other 
members of the Forum on Tax Administration MAP Forum (“the FTA MAP Forum”). 
2. One of the elements of the minimum standard 1 requires jurisdictions to seek to resolve mutual 
agreement procedure (“MAP”) cases within an average timeframe of 24 month s. To monitor compliance 
with this, jurisdictions’ progress toward meeting this target will be periodically reviewed on the basis of the 
statistics prepared in accordance with an agreed reporting framework. The 2015 Action 14 Report (OECD, 
2015[1]) explains that the reporting framework will include agreed milestones for the initiation and 
conclusion/closing of a MAP case, as well as other relevant stages of the MAP process. The minimum 
standard also requires jurisdictions to provide timely and complete reporting of MAP statistics, pursuant to 
the agreed reporting framework.    
3. The agreed reporting framework is set out in this note. Section II describes the MAP process to 
the extent it is relevant for MAP Statistics reporting purposes, in particular focusing on the relevant 
milestones. Section III sets out the statistics reporting templates for the reporting and publication of MAP 
case inventory and MAP outcomes, and the average time taken for each of the key stages of the  MAP 
process, including the definition of terms used. 
4. As part of the 2020 Review of the Action 14 minimum standard, the Inclusive Framework reviewed 
this reporting framework with a view to collecting additional data on the MAP process. Accordingly, it was 
agreed that jurisdictions would report the additional data points listed below as part of their annually 
reported MAP Statistics from the 2023 reporting year onwards. In line with the 2015 Action 14 report  
(OECD, 2015[1]), some of this additional data would facilitate a more in -depth review of jurisdictions’ MAP 
practices and would provide transparency with respect to each reporting jurisdiction’s MAP programme as 
well as a comprehensive picture of the overall state of the MAP in all of the reporting jurisdictions. However, 
due care has also been taken to avoid onerous reporting obligations and to only focus on additional data 
that would provide benefits without imposing excessive resource burdens. These additional data points 
are described in detail in Section IV below. 
3 MAP Statistics Reporting Framework (updated December 2022)

# Page 50
       49 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
MAP process  
5. Article 25 of the OECD Model Tax Convention  (OECD, 2019[2]) provides for a MAP mechanism, 
independent from the legal remedies available under domestic la w, through which the competent 
authorities of the Contracting States to a tax treaty (“ Contracting States ”) may resolve differences or 
difficulties regarding the interpretation or application of the tax treaty on a mutually-agreed basis. The MAP 
mechanism is of fundamental importance to the proper application and interpretation of tax treaties, notably 
to ensure that taxpayers entitled to the benefits of the tax treaty are not subject to taxation by either of the 
Contracting States which is not in accordance with the provisions of the tax treaty. In this regard, paragraph 
1 of Article 25 of the OECD Model Tax Convention  (OECD, 2019 [2]) provides that where a taxpayer 
considers that the actions of one or both Contracting States result or will result for that taxpayer in taxation 
not in accordance with the provisions of the treaty, the taxpayer may, irrespective of the remedies provided 
by the domestic law of those States, make a request to the competent authority of either Contracting State. 
6. Prior to the adoption of the Action 14 minimum standard, Article 25(1) stipulated that a taxpayer 
could submit a MAP request to the competent authority of the Contracting State of which he is a resident 
or, if the case comes under the pr ovisions relating to the Non -Discrimination Article 2, to that of the 
Contracting State of which the taxpayer is a national. With the 2017 update of the OECD Model Tax 
Convention (OECD, 2019 [2]), Article 25(1) has been amended to allow taxpayers to submit their MAP 
request to the competent authority of either Contracting State, such to ensure that both competent 
authorities are aware of the MAP request being submitted and are able to give their views on whether the 
request is accepted or rejected and on whether the taxpayer’s objection is considered to be justified. The 
Commentary on Article 25 further explains that the taxpayer may present its case to the competent 
authority of either Contracting State and the taxpayer i s not precluded from presenting its case to the 
competent authority of both Contracting States at the same time. Where the taxpayer submits the MAP 
request to both competent authorities at the same time, he should appropriately inform both competent 
authorities, in order to facilitate a co-ordinated approach to the case.3  
7. The Action 14 minimum standard allows jurisdictions the option to include in their tax treaties either 
Article 25(1) of the OECD Model Tax Convention  (OECD, 2019[2]) as amended with the 2017 update, or 
as it previously read in the 2014 version. Where the treaty in place between the Contracting States contains 
Article 25(1) as it read in its 2014 version – thus allowing taxpayers to submit a MAP request  to the 
competent authority of the Contracting State in which he is a resident (or, if the case comes under the 
provisions relating to the Non-discrimination Article, to that of the Contracting State of which the taxpayer 
is a national) – jurisdictions are under the Action 14 minimum standard required to implement a bilateral 
consultation or notification process to be applied when its competent authority does not consider the 
taxpayer’s objection to be justified and which allows the other competent authorit y to provide its views on 
the case (such consultation shall not be interpreted as consultation as to how to resolve the case).  
8. To be admissible, a case presented under paragraph 1 of Article 25 must be presented within the 
timeframe stipulated in the tax treaty from the first notification of the action which gives rise to taxation not 
in accordance with the tax treaty. Once a case that meets the requirements of paragraph 1 of Article 25 
has been accepted, the competent authority to which the case was presented must determine whether the 
taxpayer’s objection appears to be justified. If that is the case, that competent authority may be able to 
resolve the case unilaterally, e.g. where the taxation contrary to the provisions of the tax treaty is due in 
whole or in part to a measure taken in the Contracting State to which the taxpayer has presented its MAP 
case. A MAP case that has been accepted will only move to the second, bilateral stage of the MAP process 
where it meets two requirements provided by paragraph 2 of Article 25: (i) the taxpayer’s objection appear 
to be justified to the competent authority to which it has been presented and (ii) that competent authority 
is not itself able to arrive at a satisfactory unilateral solution. Paragraph 2 of Article 25 n o doubt entails a 
duty to negotiate; but as far as reaching mutual agreement through the procedure is concerned, the 
competent authorities are under a duty merely to use their best endeavours and not to achieve a result. 4

# Page 51
50        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
9. The MAP process to the extent it i s relevant for MAP Statistics reporting purposes, in particular 
the relevant milestones along with their Commentary, is set out below. 
Figure 1. Steps of the MAP process for the reporting of MAP Statistics 
 
Source: OECD 
10. Element C.2 of the Terms of Reference requires that jurisdictions seek to resolve MAP cases 
within an average time frame of 24 months. Given the collaborative approach to be taken by competent 
authorities to achieve the common objective to resolve MAP case s in a timely manner, this timeframe 
applies to both jurisdictions (i.e. the jurisdiction that receives the MAP request from the taxpayer and its 
treaty partner). To compute the average time taken to resolve MAP cases, the “start” date and “end” date 
for each MAP case should be determined as below. Competent authorities should communicate effectively 
with each other to ensure that they have common data points for the purposes of MAP Statistics reporting. 
The data points for each MAP request include (i) the “start” date; (ii) the date of Milestone 1 (if applicable); 
(iii) the “end” date; and (iv) the number of MAP cases involved in a MAP request. 5  
(i) Starting of MAP case (“start” date) 
11. Given the collaborative approach to be taken by competent authorities to  achieve the common 
objective to resolve MAP cases in a timely manner, it is important that both competent authorities are well 
aware of the MAP request. In this regard, the competent authority that receives the MAP request from the 
taxpayer should notify the other competent authority of the request within a target time frame of four weeks 
from the receipt of the taxpayer’s MAP request. Such notification should include at least the following: (a) 
identification of the taxpayer(s) concerned (e.g. name and ad dress, tax identification number(s) or birth 
date (where appropriate)); (b) tax years covered; (c) brief issue(s) (e.g. the article(s) concerned and 
whether the MAP case is an attribution/allocation case); and (d) the date of receipt of the taxpayer’s MAP 
request and the taxpayer’s covering letter (where appropriate). This notification should also include the 
contact details (e.g. contact number and email) of the official(s) handling the MAP request to facilitate 
efficient communication between the competen t authorities on the MAP case concerned. The competent 
authority that receives the notification is given the opportunity, if it so wishes, to confirm receipt of the 
notification and any such confirmation should be made within one week of the date of the notification. The 
notification and any confirmation of receipt should as much as possible be made by electronic means to 
accelerate the communication process. 
C.2. of TOR: target 
average time of 24 
months
D.2. of TOR: 
implemented 
on a timely 
basis
Date of 
receipt of 
taxpayer’s 
MAP 
request
Starting of 
MAP case
“start” date
Milestone 1 
(if applicable)
Date of position 
paper 
Closing of 
MAP case 
“end” date
Preventing 
Disputes
Availability and / or Access 
to MAP
Resolution of MAP 
Cases
Implementation of 
MAP Agreements

# Page 52
       51 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
12. Recognising that the taxpayer’s MAP submission might not include all the information and 
documentation required for the competent authority to examine the MAP request, and that the notification 
including the confirmation of receipt of the notification (where applicable) in paragraph 10 above could be 
made before the competent authority receives all such information, the “start” date shall be: 
(v) One week from the date of notification by the competent authority that receives the MAP 
request from the taxpayer or five weeks from the receipt of the taxpayer’s MAP request, 
whichever is the earlier date;6 except 
(vi) where a competent authority receives a MAP request that does not include all the information 
and documentation required to be furnished pursuant to its published MAP guidance and the 
competent authority requests such information and/or documentation within three months from 
the receipt of the MAP submission, in which case the “start” date shall be the date under (i) or 
the date when such missing information and/or documentation is received by that competent 
authority, whichever is the later date. 
13. There are also instances where members of the same taxpayer group submit MAP requests on 
the same issue(s) to their respective competent authorities (for example, in transfer pricing cases where 
the parties to a transaction each submit a MAP request to their respect ive competent authorities arising 
from a primary adjustment made by one of the Contracting States). Furthermore, as described in paragraph 
5 above, a taxpayer could also submit the same MAP request to both competent authorities. In these 
circumstances, where there are different dates for the competent authorities under the application of the 
rules in paragraph 10 above, the earlier date shall be the “start” date.   
(ii) Closing of MAP case (“end” date) 
14. The “end” date of a MAP case is (i) the date of an official communication (typically in the form of a 
letter) from the competent authority to the taxpayer to inform him of the outcome of its MAP request; or (ii) 
the date the competent authority receives a notification from the taxpayer on the withdrawal of its MAP 
request. The competent authority that receives the MAP request from the taxpayer should also duly inform 
the other competent authority of its notification to the taxpayer on the outcome of the MAP case or in case 
of a withdrawal of the MAP request by the taxpayer, of the date of such withdrawal. For (i), the outcome of 
a MAP request could be one of the following:  
 access to MAP is denied (i.e. not an admissible request or denied for any other reaso ns) 
 objection is not justified objection 
 objection is resolved via domestic remedy 
 unilateral relief will be granted 
 competent authority agreement that will (or would, if accepted by taxpayer, regardless of whether 
the taxpayer accepts that outcome) fully eliminate double taxation or fully resolve taxation not in 
accordance with the tax treaty 
 competent authority agreement that will (or would, if accepted by taxpayer, regardless of whether 
the taxpayer accepts that outcome) partially eliminate double taxati on or partially resolve taxation 
not in accordance with the tax treaty 
 competent authority agreement that there is no taxation not in accordance with the tax treaty  
 no competent authority agreement is reached including agreement to disagree 
 any other outcome.  
15. In instances where more than one taxpayer submits a MAP request on the same issue(s) to their 
respective competent authorities as described in paragraph 12 above or where a taxpayer could also 
submit the same MAP request to both competent authorities as described in paragraph 5 above, and there 
are different “end” dates for the competent authorities, the “end” date shall be the earlier of these dates.

# Page 53
52        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
(iii) Milestone 1 (if applicable): Date of position paper 
16. In the second stage of the MAP as desc ribed in paragraph 7 which is aimed at “resolving the 
dispute on an agreed basis, i.e. by agreement between competent authorities”, one of the competent 
authorities would present its position on the case to the other competent authority (via a “position pa per”) 
before the commencement of discussions between the competent authorities. 7 The position paper should 
provide the basis for and explanation of the position taken by the jurisdiction and should address the 
arguments made by the taxpayer in its submissi on, to facilitate the discussion of the case with the other 
competent authority. The date to be captured for purposes of Milestone 1 for both competent authorities is 
the date the position paper is presented by one competent authority to the other competen t authority. In 
instances where there is more than one position paper, the date of the earliest position paper shall be the 
date for Milestone 1.  
MAP Statistics reporting and publication 
17. In accordance with one of the elements of the Action 14 minimum stan dard8, the Terms of 
Reference9 require jurisdictions to provide timely and complete reporting of MAP statistics pursuant to an 
agreed template and reporting framework. This framework is described below:  
(i) Annex 3.A. is for the reporting and publication of MAP statistics relating to MAP requests that 
are not reported under Annex 3.B. (“pre-2016 cases”);  
(ii) Annex 3.B. which comprises Part (I) and Part (II) is for the reporting and publication of MAP 
statistics relating to MAP cases that are received by a compete nt authority from the taxpayer 
on or after 1 January 2016 (“post-2015 cases”); and 
(iii) Annex 3.C. and Annex 3.D. contain definitions of terms and the rules for counting MAP cases 
for the purposes of Annex 3.A. and Annex 3.B. 
18. A jurisdiction should report its MAP statistics in accordance with the reporting templates in Annex 
3.A. and Annex 3.B. for a calendar year by no later than 31 May of the following calendar year, for 
subsequent publication on the OECD website. Jurisdictions are to submit their first reports by 31 May 2017 
for the 2016 calendar year (also referred to as the 2016 reporting period). For the 2016 reporting period, 
Annex 3.B. will be published on an aggregated basis instead of on a jurisdiction specific basis.  
19. For new members that joined the Inclusive Framework after 2016, they are to submit their first 
reports by 31 May of the year following the year of their membership. For example, if a member joins the 
Inclusive Framework in 2017, it should submit its first report by 31 May 2018. In this first report, it should 
report MAP statistics relating to MAP cases that are received by a competent authority from the taxpayer 
on or after 1 January 2017 in Annex 3.B. (for “post-2016 cases”) and report in Annex 3.A. (“for pre-2017 
cases”) statistics relating to MAP requests not reported under Annex 3.B. In this regard, for members that 
joined the Inclusive Framework after 2016, all references to “pre -2016” in this note should be understood 
to mean “pre-year of membership” and all references to “post-2015” means “post-year preceding the year 
of membership”. 
Additional data reporting from the 2023 reporting year onwards 
20. The following data points need to be reported as from the 2023 reporting year onwards:

# Page 54
       53 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
(i) Break down of the average time taken to resolve post-2015 MAP cases into two 
further groups: MAP cases closed under the unilateral stage and MAP cases closed 
under the bilateral stage 
21. Each jurisdiction should also report the aggregate average time taken to resolve post-2015 MAP 
cases that are closed in a year in two additional groups, for each type of case: 
 Average time taken for cases closed in the unilateral stage in aggregate (i.e. outcomes:  “denied 
MAP access”, “objection is not justified” and “unilateral relief granted”); and  
 Average time taken for cases closed in the bilateral stage in aggregate (i.e. all other outcomes). 
22. The average time taken for cases in these categories would be calculated based on the “Start 
Date” and “End Date” as agreed in this framewor k and matching of this data with the concerned treaty 
partners is not required.  
23. This data should be reported from the 2023 reporting year onwards and would be published as 
described in Annex 3.B. A footnote has been added in this regard to note that this data is not subject to 
matching and to provide clarity on how this data should be interpreted. Annex 3.D contains definitions of 
terms and the rules relevant to this data point as well. 
(ii) Identification of the age of pending post-2015 MAP cases 
24. Each jurisdiction should also report the age of post-2015 MAP cases that are remaining in its MAP 
inventory on 31 December of each year on an aggregate basis. This would be done by identifying the 
aggregate number of such MAP cases that were initiated in different ranges of years, calculated based on 
the “Start Date” as agreed in this framework and matching of this data with the concerned treaty partners 
is not required.  
This data should be reported from the 2023 reporting year onwards and would be published as de scribed 
in Annex 3.B. A footnote has been added in this regard to note that this data is not subject to matching 
and to provide clarity on how this data should be interpreted. Annex 3.D. contains definitions of terms and 
the rules relevant to this data point as well.

# Page 55
54        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
References 
 
OECD (2019), Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital 2017 (Full Version), OECD 
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/g2g972ee-en. 
[2] 
OECD (2015), Making Dispute Resolution Mechanisms More Effective, Action 14 - 2015 Final 
Report, OECD/G20 Base Erosion and Profit Shifting Project, OECD Publishing, Paris, 
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264241633-en. 
[1] 
 
 
Notes
1 See element C.2 of the Terms of Reference to monitor and review the implementation of the BEPS Action 14 
minimum standard to make dispute resolution mechanisms more effective (“Terms of Reference”). 
2 See paragraph 1 of Article 24 of the OECD Model Tax Convention. 
3 See paragraph 17 of the Commentary on Article 25.   
4 See paragraph 37 of the Commentary on Article 25. 
5 This MAP Statistics Reporting Framework  defines “start date” and “end date” for purposes of computing the time 
taken to resolve a MAP case. These stat istical purposes should be distinguished from the purposes of timeframes in 
arbitration provisions; the time frames relevant in that latter context must be determined based on the provisions of 
the relevant arbitration clause and/or relevant competent authority agreements on the application of such clause. 
6 For MAP requests received by a competent authority on or after 1 January 2016 but prior to 1 July 2016, the “start” 
date shall be 5 weeks from the receipt of the taxpayer’s MAP request. 
7 It is anticipated that, in transfer pricing cases, the competent authority of the jurisdiction raising the adjustment will 
prepare the first position paper.     
8 See element 1.5 of the minimum standard in the 2015 Action 14 Report. 
9 See paragraph 11 of the Terms of Reference.

# Page 56
       55 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Annex 3.A. MAP Statistics reporting for the [YEAR] reporting period (1 
January [YEAR] to 31 December [YEAR]) by [Name of Jurisdiction] for pre-
2016 cases closed in the [YEAR] reporting period 
Annex A should be submitted to the Secretariat (email: fta.map@oecd.org) by 31 May of the calendar year following the year of the reporting period for subsequent publication on the 
OECD website so long as there are pre-2016 cases in the jurisdiction’s MAP inventory on 1 January of the reporting year.  
For countries that are currently reporting MAP statistics for publication on the OECD website (see: http://www.oecd.org/ctp/dispute/), with effect from the 2016 reporting period (1 January 
2016 to 31 December 2016) they are only required to report MAP statistics for publication based on Annex A of this note.   
Jurisdictions should report their MAP statistics for pre-2016 cases based on the definition of terms and rules for counting MAP cases as contained in Annex C.  
 
 
category of 
cases  
no. of pre-
2016 cases 
in MAP 
inventory 
on 1 
January 
[YEAR]  
number of pre-2016 cases closed during the reporting period by outcome:  
no. of pre-
2016 cases 
remaining 
in MAP 
inventory 
on 31 
December 
[YEAR] 
average time 
taken (in 
months) for 
closing pre-
2016 cases 
during the 
reporting 
period 
 
denied 
MAP 
access 
objection 
is not 
justified 
withdraw
n by 
taxpayer 
unilateral 
relief 
granted 
resolved 
via 
domestic 
remedy 
agreement 
fully 
eliminating 
double 
taxation / 
fully 
resolving 
taxation not 
in 
accordance 
with tax 
treaty  
agreement 
partially 
eliminating 
double 
taxation  / 
partially 
resolving 
taxation not 
in 
accordance 
with tax 
treaty  
agreemen
t that 
there is 
no 
taxation 
not in 
accordan
ce with 
tax treaty 
no 
agreemen
t 
including 
agreemen
t to 
disagree 
any other 
outcome 
 
 Column 1 Column 2 Column 3 Column 4 Column 5 Column 6 Column 7 Column 8 Column 9 Column 10 Column 11 Column 12 Column 13 Column 14 
Row 1 Attribution / 
Allocation 
             
Row 2 Others              
Row 3 Total              
Note:  
A reporting jurisdiction can include in this notes section any information which in its view would be useful in providing clarification or understanding on any of the statistics reported above.

# Page 57
56        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Notes on Annex 3.A. (see also Annex 3.C. - Definition of Terms and Rules for 
Counting MAP Cases)  
(i) Column 2: Number of pre-2016 cases in MAP inventory on 1 January [Year] 
Enter in this column the number of pre -2016 cases (i.e. MAP request received which are not 
reported in Annex 3.B.) in your MAP inventory that are pending resolution as of 1 January of 
the reporting period, reporting separately for “Attribution / Allocation” (see Row 1, Column 1) 
and “Others” (see Row 2, Column 1) MAP cases. The “ Total” (see Row 3, Column 1) is the 
sum of the number of cases for “Attribution / Allocation” and “Others”.  
(ii) Columns 3 to 12: Number of pre-2016 cases closed during the reporting period 
with an outcome as described in columns 3 to 12 
Enter in each of these columns the number of pre -2016 cases closed in the reporting period 
based on the outcome of each case as stated in the heading of each of these columns, reporting 
separately for “Attribution / Allocation” and “Others” MAP cases. The “Total” for each of these 
columns is the sum of the number of cases reported under each of these columns for 
“Attribution / Allocation” and “Others”.  
(iii) Column 13: Number of pre-2016 cases remaining in MAP inventory on 31 
December [Year] 
Enter in this co lumn the number of pre -2016 cases in your MAP inventory that are pending 
resolution as of 31 December of the year, reporting separately for “Attribution / Allocation ” 
and “Others” MAP cases.   
The number of pre -2016 cases relating to “ Attribution / Allocat ion” and “ Others” should 
reflect:  
 the number of pre -2016 cases in MAP inventory on 1 January of the reporting period 
(Column 2) for that category of cases;  
 minus the number of pre -2016 cases that are closed during the reporting period with 
outcome as stated in Columns 3 to 12 for that category of cases. 
The “Total” number of pre-2016 cases remaining in your MAP inventory on 31 December of the 
year is the sum of the number of pre -2016 cases relating to “ Attribution / Allocation ” and 
“Others” that are remaining in the MAP inventory on 31 December of the year.  
(iv) Column 14: Average time taken (in months) for closing pre-2016 cases during 
the reporting period 
Enter in this column the average time taken (in months) from the start to the cl ose of pre-2016 
cases for such cases closed during the reporting period, reporting separately for “ Attribution / 
Allocation”, “Others” and “Total”.

# Page 58
       57 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Annex 3.B. MAP Statistics reporting for the [YEAR] reporting period (1 
January [YEAR] to 31 December [YEAR]) by [Name of Jurisdiction] for post-
2015 cases closed in the [YEAR] reporting period1  
Annex B should be submitted to the Secretariat (email: fta.map@oecd.org) by 31 May of the calendar year following the year of the reporting period for subsequent publication on the 
OECD website. For the 2016 reporting period, Annex B will be published on an aggregated basis instead of on jurisdiction specific basis.      
For countries that are currently reporting MAP Statistics for publication on the OECD website (see: http://www.oecd.org/ctp/dispute/), with effect from the 2016 reporting period (1 January 
2016 to 31 December 2016) they are only required to report MAP Statistics for publication based on Annex B of this note.   
Jurisdictions should report their MAP Statistics for post-2015 cases based on the definition of terms and rules for counting MAP cases as contained in Annex D. 
(I)  MAP Statistics for Post-2015 Cases for purposes of MAP case inventory and MAP outcomes for the reporting period 
 table 1: attribution / allocation map cases 
 
Treaty 
Partner 
no. of 
post-2015 
cases in 
MAP 
inventory 
on 1 
January 
[YEAR] 
no. of 
post-2015 
cases 
started 
during 
the 
reporting 
period 
number of post-2015 cases closed during the reporting period by outcome: 
no. of post-
2015 cases 
remaining 
in MAP 
inventory 
on 31 
December 
[YEAR] 
denied 
MAP 
access 
objection 
is not 
justified 
withdraw
n by 
taxpayer 
unilateral 
relief 
granted 
resolved 
via 
domestic 
remedy 
agreement 
fully 
eliminating 
double 
taxation  / 
fully 
resolving 
taxation not 
in 
accordance 
with tax 
treaty  
agreement 
partially 
eliminating 
double taxation  
/ partially 
resolving 
taxation not in 
accordance 
with tax treaty  
agreemen
t that 
there is 
no 
taxation 
not in 
accordan
ce with 
tax treaty 
no 
agreemen
t 
including 
agreemen
t to 
disagree 
any other 
outcome 
Column 1 Column 2 Column 3 Column 4 Column 5 Column 6 Column 7 Column 8 Column 9 Column 10 Column 11 Column 12 Column 13 Column 14 
Row 1 Treaty 
Partner 1              
                                                
1 Reservation by Germany: Germany is reserving its position on jurisdiction-specific reporting pending staff council agreement required by Federal Law governing the production of 
statistics relating to the work of less than three staff members.

# Page 59
58        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
 Treaty 
Partner 2              
 …              
Row 2 
Treaty 
Partners 
(de minimis 
rule 
applies) 
 
 
 
 
         
Row 3 
Treaty 
Partners 
(Others) 
 
 
 
 
         
 Total              
Note: A reporting jurisdiction can include in this notes section any information which in its view would be useful in providing clarification or understanding on any of the statistics reported above. 
 Table 2: Other MAP cases 
 
Treaty 
Partner 
no. of 
post-2015 
cases in 
MAP 
inventory 
on 1 
January 
[YEAR] 
no. of 
post-2015 
cases 
started 
during 
the 
reporting 
period 
number of post-2015 cases closed during the reporting period by outcome: 
no. of post-
2015 cases 
remaining 
in MAP 
inventory 
on 31 
December 
[YEAR] 
denied 
MAP 
access 
objection 
is not 
justified 
withdraw
n by 
taxpayer 
unilateral 
relief 
granted 
resolved 
via 
domestic 
remedy 
agreement fully 
eliminating 
double taxation  
/ fully resolving 
taxation not in 
accordance 
with tax treaty  
agreement 
partially 
eliminating 
double 
taxation  / 
partially 
resolving 
taxation not 
in 
accordance 
with tax 
treaty  
agreemen
t that 
there is 
no 
taxation 
not in 
accordan
ce with 
tax treaty 
no 
agreemen
t 
including 
agreemen
t to 
disagree 
any other 
outcome 
Column 1 Column 2 Column 3 Column 4 Column 5 Column 6 Column 7 Column 8 Column 9 Column 10 Column 11 Column 12 Column 13 Column 14 
Row 1 Treaty 
Partner 1              
 Treaty 
Partner 2              
 …              
Row 2 
Treaty 
Partners 
(de minimis 
rule 
applies)

# Page 60
       59 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Row 3 
Treaty 
Partners 
(Others) 
 
 
 
 
         
 Total              
Note: A reporting jurisdiction can include in this notes section any information which in its view would be useful in providing clarification or understanding on any of the statistics reported above. 
 
 Table 3: All post-2015 MAP Cases pending on 31 December [YEAR] 2 
 
Categories for age of MAP cases Aggregate number of cases remaining in MAP inventory on 31 December [YEAR] 
falling under each category based on “Start” 
Column 1 Column 2 
Row 
1 <2 years old 
 
Row 
2 >=2 and <4 years old 
 
Row 
3 >=4 and <6 years old 
 
Row 
4 >=6 years old 
 
Note: A reporting jurisdiction can include in this notes section any information which in its view would be useful in providing clarification or understanding on any of the statistics reported above. 
                                                
2 Please note that this data has not been matched with the concerned treaty partners. In addition, please note that delays in individual MAP cases may be owing to several reasons, 
many of them being out of the concerned competent authority’s control, and thus, the age of pending MAP cases should be seen in conjunction with the attempts made by jurisdictions 
to resolve such cases as evident in the average time taken to resolve cases.

# Page 61
60        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Notes on Part (I) of Annex 3.B. (see also Annex 3.D. - Definition of terms and 
rules for counting MAP cases)  
(v)  Column 1 of Table 1 and Table 2: Treaty Partner  
For each table (i.e. Table 1 for Attribution / Allocation MAP c ases and Table 2 for Other MAP 
cases), separate reporting of MAP cases with a treaty partner is required only if:  
(a) the number of post -2015 cases in your MAP inventory on 1 January of the year 
(see e.g. Row 1, Column 2) plus the number of post-2015 cases started during the 
reporting period (see e.g. Row 1, Column 3) with that treaty partner is at least five; 
and  
(b) that treaty partner is also reporting MAP Statistics for the reporting period in 
accordance with this framework.  
If such a number is less than five , the MAP statistic relating to that treaty partner shall be 
aggregated and be reported under the category “Treaty Partners (de minimis rule applies)” (see 
Row 2), together with other treaty partners that are also reporting MAP Statistics in accordance 
with this framework and where the number of MAP cases with each of them is also less than 
five.  
For MAP Statistics relating to all other treaty partners (i.e. those not reporting MAP Statistics for 
the reporting period in accordance with this framework), the MAP statistic relating to those treaty 
partners shall be aggregated and be reported together under the category “Treaty Partners 
(Others)” (see Row 3). 
(vi) Column 2 of Table 1 and Table 2: Number of post-2015 cases in MAP inventory 
on 1 January [Year]  
Enter in this column the number of post -2015 cases (i.e. MAP cases that are received by a 
competent authority from the taxpayer on or after 1 January 2016) in your MAP inventory that 
are pending resolution as of 1 January of the year. 
Note that for the first reporting period, i.e. 2016 reporting period, the number of post-2015 cases 
in your MAP inventory should be reflected as “0” since all MAP cases that are received by a 
competent authority from the taxpayer prior to 1 January 2016 should be reported in Annex 
3.A. of this note.    
(vii) Column 3 of Table 1 and Table 2: Number of post-2015 cases started during the 
reporting period 
Enter in this column the number of post -2015 cases started during the reporting period (i.e. 
where the start date of the case falls within the reporting period).  
(viii) Columns 4 to 13 of Table 1 and Table 2: Number of post-2015 cases closed 
during the reporting period with an outcome as described in Columns 4 to 13 
Enter in each of these columns the number of post -2015 cases closed in the reporting period 
based on the outcome of each case as stated in the heading of each of these columns .  
Note that these cases should not include pre -2016 cases which are closed in the reporting 
period as such cases should be reported in Annex 3.A. of this note.

# Page 62
       61 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
(ix) Column 14 of Table 1 and Table 2: Number of post-2015 cases remaining in 
MAP inventory on 31 December [Year] 
Enter in this column the number of post -2015 cases in your MAP inventory that are pending 
resolution as of 31 December of the year.   
The number of post -2015 cases remaining in the MAP inventory on 31 December of the year 
should reflect:  
 the number of post -2015 cases in MAP inventory on 1 January of the reporting period 
(Column 2); 
 plus the number of post-2015 cases started during the reporting period (Column 3);   
 minus the number of post-2015 cases that are closed during the reporting period with 
outcome as stated in Columns 4 to 13. 
(x) Row 1 of Table 3: Number of post-2015 cases remaining in MAP inventory on 
31 December [Year] falling under the age category “<2 years old” 
In Column 2 to Row 1, the number of post-2015 cases in your MAP inventory that are pending 
resolution as of 31 December of the [Year] , which were initiated on or after 1 January [Year -2] 
based on the “Start Date”, would be published. 
(xi) Row 2 of Table 3: Number of post-2015 cases remaining in MAP inventory on 
31 December [Year] falling under the age category “>=2 and <4 years old” 
In Column 2 to Row 2 the number of post-2015 cases in your MAP inventory that are pending 
resolution as of 31 December of the [Year], which were initiated on or after 1 January [Year-4], 
but before 31 December [Year-3] based on the “Start Date”, would be published.   
(xii) Row 3 of Table 3: Number of post-2015 cases remaining in MAP inventory on 
31 December [Year] falling under the age category “>=4 and <6 years old” 
In Column 2 to Row 3 the number of post-2015 cases in your MAP inv entory that are pending 
resolution as of 31 December of the [Year], which were initiated on or after 1 January [Year-6], 
but before 31 December [Year-5] based on the “Start Date”, would be published.   
(xiii) Row 4 of Table 3: Number of post-2015 cases remaining in MAP inventory on 
31 December [Year] falling under the age category “>=6 years old” 
In Column 2 to Row 4 the number of post-2015 cases in your MAP inventory that are pending 
resolution as of 31 December of the [Year] , which were initiated on or before 31 December 
[Year-7] based on the “Start Date”, would be published.

# Page 63
62        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
(II) MAP Statistics for purposes of average time taken for key stages of the MAP process for post-2015 cases closed during the 
reporting period  
 Table 1: Attribution / Allocation MAP Cases 
 
Treaty Partner 
average time taken (in months) for post-2015 cases from: 
“Start” to “End”  Receipt of taxpayer’s MAP 
request to “Start”  “Start” to Milestone 1 Milestone 1 to “End”  
Column 1 Column 2 Column 3 Column 4 Column 5 
Row 1 Treaty Partner 1     
 Treaty Partner 2     
 …     
 Treaty Partners (de minimis rule 
applies) 
    
Row 2 Treaty Partners (Others)     
Row 3 Total Average Time      
Note: A reporting jurisdiction can include in this notes section any information which in its view would be useful in providing clarification or understanding on any of the statistics reported above. 
 Annex to Table 1:  Attribution / Allocation MAP Cases3 
 Stage during which the MAP case was resolved Average time taken (in months) for post-2015 cases from "Start" to "End" 
Column 1 Column 2 
Row 1 Cases closed in the Unilateral stage  
Row 2 Cases closed in the Bilateral stage  
 Notes  
A reporting jurisdiction can include in this notes section any information which in its  view would be useful in providing clarification or understanding on any of the 
statistics reported above.   
Note: A reporting jurisdiction can include in this notes section any information which in its view would be useful in providing clarification or understanding on any of the statistics reported above. 
                                                
3 Please note that this data has not been matched with the concerned treaty partners. In addition, please note that delays in individual MAP cases may be owing to several reasons, 
many of them being out of the concerned competent authority’s control, and thus, the time taken in the unilateral and bilateral stages should not be seen in isolation of the overall 
average time and inventory management.

# Page 64
       63 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
 
 Table 2: Other MAP Cases 
 
Treaty Partner 
average time taken (in months) for post-2015 cases from: 
“Start” to “End”  Receipt of taxpayer’s MAP 
request to “Start”  “Start” to Milestone 1 Milestone 1 to End”  
Column 1 Column 2 Column 3 Column 4 Column 5 
Row 1 Treaty Partner 1     
 Treaty Partner 2     
 …     
 Treaty Partners (de minimis rule 
applies) 
    
Row 2 Treaty Partners (Others)     
Row 3 Total Average Time      
Note: A reporting jurisdiction can include in this notes section any information which in its view would be useful in providing clarification or understanding on any of the statistics reported above. 
 
 Annex to Table 24:  Other MAP Cases 
 
Stage during which the MAP case was resolved average time taken (in months) for post-2015 cases from "Start" to "End" 
Column 1 Column 2 
Row 1 Cases closed in the Unilateral stage  
Row 2 Cases closed in the Bilateral stage  
Note: A reporting jurisdiction can include in this notes section any information which in its view would be useful in providing clarification or understanding on any of the statistics reported above. 
                                                
4 Please note that this data has not been matched with the concerned treaty partners. In addition, please note that delays in individual MAP cases may be owing to several reasons, 
many of them being out of the concerned competent authority’s control, and thus, the time taken in the unilateral and bilateral stages should not be seen in isolation of the overall 
average time and inventory management.

# Page 65
64        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
 
 Table 3: All MAP Cases 
 
 
average time taken (in months) for post-2015 cases from: 
“Start” to “End”  Receipt of taxpayer’s MAP 
request to “Start”  “Start” to Milestone 1 Milestone 1 to “End”  
Column 1 Column 2 Column 3 Column 4 
Row 1 Total Average Time      
Note: A reporting jurisdiction can include in this notes section any information which in its view would be useful in providing clarification or understanding on any of the statistics reported above.

# Page 66
       65 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Notes on Part (II) of Annex 3.B. (see also Annex 3.D. - Definition of Terms and 
Rules for Counting MAP Cases)  
(xiv) Column 1 of Table 1 and Table 2: Treaty Partner   
For each table (i.e. Table 1 for Attribution / Allocation MAP cases and Table 2 for Other 
MAP cases), separate reporting of MAP cases with a treaty partner is required only if the MAP 
Statistics in Part (I) of Annex 3.B. are separately reported for that treaty partner.   
(xv) Columns 2 to 5 of Table 1 and Table 2: Average time taken (in months) for post-
2015 cases closed during the reporting period for the completion of the action 
as described in Columns 2 to 5 
Enter in each of these columns the average time taken (in months) for the completion of the 
action as stated in the heading of each of these columns for post-2015 cases closed during the 
reporting period.  
In instances where a treaty partner is not reporting MAP Statistics under this reporting framework 
for the reporting period concerned (see Row 2), the “start” date shall be determined based on 
paragraphs 10 or 11 of this note to the extent possible . Otherwise, these dates shall be 
determined on a reasonable basis.  
(xvi) Row 3 of Table 1: Total average time  
Enter in Columns 2 to 5 of Row 3 the total average time (in months) for the completion of the 
action as stated in the heading of each of these columns for all post -2015 “ Attribution / 
Allocation” cases closed during the reporting period.  
(xvii) Row 1 of Annex to Table 1: Cases closed in the Unilateral stage  
Enter in Column 2 to Row 1 the total average time (in months) for the completion of all post -
2015 “Attribution / Allocation ” cases closed during the reporting period  under the outcomes 
“denied MAP access”, “objection is not justified” and “unilateral relief granted”. 
(xviii) Row 2 of Annex to Table 1: Cases closed in the Bilateral stage  
Enter in Column 2 to Row 2 the total average time (in months) for the completion of all post-
2015 “Attribution / Allocation ” cases closed during the reporting period under the outcomes 
withdrawn by taxpayer ”, “resolved via domestic remedy ”, “agreement fully eliminating double 
taxation eliminated / fully resolving taxation not in accordance with tax treaty ”, “agreement 
partially eliminating double taxation / partially resolving taxation not in accordance with tax 
treaty”, “agreement that there is no taxation not in accordance with tax treaty ”, “no agreement 
including agreement to disagree” and “any other outcome”. 
(xix) Row 3 of Table 2: Total average time  
Enter in Columns 2 to 5 of Row 3 the total average time (in months) for the completion of the 
action as stated in the heading of each of these columns for all post-2015 “Other” cases closed 
during the reporting period.

# Page 67
66        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
(xx) Row 1 of Annex to Table 2: Cases closed in the Unilateral stage  
Enter in Column 2 to Row 1 the total average time (in months) for the completion of all post -
2015 “Other” cases closed during the reporting period under the outcomes  “denied MAP 
access”, “objection is not justified” and “unilateral relief granted”. 
(xxi) Row 2 of Annex to Table 2: Cases closed in the Bilateral stage  
Enter in Column 2 to Row 2 the total average time (in months) for the completion of all post -
2015 “ Other” cas es closed during the reporting period under the outcomes  “withdrawn by 
taxpayer”, “resolved via domestic remedy ”, “agreement fully eliminating double taxation 
eliminated / fully resolving taxation not in accordance with tax treaty ”, “agreement partially 
eliminating double taxation / partially resolving taxation not in accordance with tax treaty ”, 
“agreement that there is no taxation not in accordance with tax treaty”, “no agreement including 
agreement to disagree” and “any other outcome”. 
(xxii) Row 1 of Table 3: Total average time  
Enter in Columns 1 to 4 of Row 1 the total average time (in months) for the completion of the 
action as stated in the heading of each of these columns for all post -2015 cases (i.e. 
“Attribution / Allocation” and “Others”) closed during the reporting period.

# Page 68
       67 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Annex 3.C. Definition of terms and rules for 
counting MAP cases for purposes of MAP 
Statistics reporting under the reporting template 
in Annex 3.A. 
1. Jurisdictions shall apply the following definitions and counting methods for purposes of their MAP 
Statistics reporting as required under Annex 3.A. of this note:  
(a) MAP case  
(i) Countries that are currently reporting MAP Statistics1 pursuant to the MAP reporting framework 
arising from the proposals in the Committee on Fiscal Affairs' (CFA) 2007 report “Improving the 
Resolution of Tax Treaty Disputes”2 (“existing reporting framework”) could adopt the definition 
of MAP cases based on the definition as contain ed in that framework and should clearly 
indicate this in the “Notes” section. As required under the existing reporting framework, where 
a tax administration does not accept a definition or is unable to report based upon the definition, 
that administration is requested to explain the difference between its reporting and the definition 
of terms provided in the existing reporting framework. Such explanation should be contained 
in the “Notes” section.    
(ii) For all other jurisdictions, they should clearly indicate  in the “Notes” section the definition of a 
MAP case adopted by them.    
(b) Counting of MAP cases 
(i) Countries that are currently reporting MAP Statistics pursuant to the existing reporting 
framework could adopt the counting method contained in that framework and to clearly indicate 
that in the “Notes” section. If a different counting method is adopted instead, please explain the 
different method used in the “Notes” section.    
(ii) For all other jurisdictions, they should clearly indicate in “Notes” section the method of counting 
MAP cases.    
(c) Category of Cases (Attribution / Allocation and Others) – See Column 1  
Jurisdictions could categorise pre -2016 cases based on any definition adopted by them and explain the 
definition used in the “Notes” section. 
(d) Number of pre-2016 cases in MAP inventory on 1 January [YEAR] – See Column 2 
The number of pre -2016 cases in the MAP inventory on 1 January of the year is the number of MAP 
requests that are not reported in Annex 3.B. which are pending resolution as of 1 January of that year.  
(e) Number of cases closed during the reporting period with outcomes as stated in 
Columns 3 to Column 12 
(i)      Cases denied MAP access (Column 3):  
A MAP case shall be counted as a case denied MAP access if the date of notification from the 
competent authority to the taxpayer that its MAP request is denied access to MAP (see

# Page 69
68        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
paragraphs 13 and 14 of this note) falls within the reporting period. A MAP request is denied 
MAP access if it not an admissible objection or is denied access to MAP for any other reason. 
In instance whereby the taxpayer had sought the decision of an administrative appeal or judicial 
review following the notification from the competent authority that the MAP request is denied 
MAP access, and the decision is such that the case should be granted MAP access, this case 
shall be considered as a new case with the “start” date determined as (i) date of the decision 
of the administrative appeal or judicial review; or (ii) where the taxpayer is required to submit a 
new MAP request, the date as determined by the competent authority.   
(ii) Objection is not justified (Column 4):  
A MAP case shall be counted as a case where the objection is not justified if the date of 
notification from the compet ent authority to the taxpayer that its objection is not a justified 
objection (see paragraphs 13 and 14 of this note) falls within the reporting period. In instance 
whereby the taxpayer had sought the decision of an administrative appeal or judicial review  
following the notification from the competent authority that the objection from the taxpayer is 
not justified, and the decision is such that the case is a justified request, this case shall be 
considered as a new case with the “start” date determined as ( i) date of the decision of the 
administrative appeal or judicial review; or (ii) where the taxpayer is required to submit a new 
MAP request, the date as determined by the competent authority.   
(iii) Withdrawn by taxpayer (Column 5):  
A MAP case shall be counted as a case withdrawn by the taxpayer if the date of receipt of the 
taxpayer’s notification to the competent authority (see paragraphs 13 and 14 of this note) falls 
within the reporting period. However, if the case is withdrawn by taxpayer following the 
resolution of the issues through remedies provided by the domestic law of a Contracting State, 
that case shall be reflected as a case closed with the outcome “resolved via domestic remedy” 
(see Column 7).   
(iv) Unilateral relief granted (Column 6): 
A MAP case shall be counted as a case closed with unilateral relief granted if the date of 
notification from the competent authority to the taxpayer informing the taxpayer of such an 
outcome (see paragraphs 13and 14 of this note) falls within the reporting  period. Such cases 
shall not include cases whereby unilateral relief will be granted by a Contracting State following 
the outcome reached via (i) domestic remedy (such outcome shall be reflected under Column 
7); and (ii) competent authority agreement (suc h outcome shall be reflected in either Column 
8 or 9).    
(v) Resolved via domestic remedy (Column 7): 
A MAP case shall be counted as a case closed with the outcome “ resolved via domestic 
remedy” if the date of that outcome (see paragraphs 13 and 14 of this no te) falls within the 
reporting period. If the case is withdrawn by the taxpayer following an outcome reached via 
domestic remedy which lead to unilateral relief granted by a jurisdiction, that case shall be 
reflected as a case under this column and not as a case withdrawn (see Column 5) or closed 
with unilateral relief granted (see Column 6).   
(vi) Agreement fully eliminating double taxation / fully resolving taxation not in accordance with tax 
treaty (Column 8):  
A MAP case shall be counted as a case closed with agreement fully eliminating double taxation 
/ fully resolving taxation not in accordance with tax treaty if the date of notification from the 
competent authority to the taxpayer informing the taxpayer of such an agreement reached via 
competent authority discussion (regardless of whether the taxpayer accepts that outcome) (see 
paragraphs 13 and 14 of this note) falls within the reporting period. This includes cases where

# Page 70
       69 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
such an outcome is arrived at following the submission of the case to arbitration in instances 
where the tax treaty contains an arbitration provision.  
(vii) Agreement partially eliminating double taxation / partially resolving taxation not in accordance 
with the tax treaty  (Column 9):  
A MAP case shall be counted as a case closed with agreemen t partially eliminating double 
taxation / partially resolving taxation not in accordance with the tax treaty if the date of 
notification from the competent authority to the taxpayer informing the taxpayer of such an 
agreement reached via competent authorit y discussion  (regardless of whether the taxpayer 
accepts that outcome) (see paragraphs 13 and 14 of this note) falls within the reporting period. 
This includes cases where such an outcome is arrived at following the submission of the case 
to arbitration in instances where the tax treaty contains an arbitration provision. 
(viii) Agreement that there is no taxation not in accordance with the tax treaty (Column 10):  
A MAP case shall be counted as a case closed with agreement that there is no taxation not in 
accordance with the tax treaty if the date of notification from the competent authority to the 
taxpayer informing the taxpayer of such an agreement reached via competent authority 
discussion (regardless of whether the taxpayer accepts that outcome) (see paragraphs 13 and 
14 of this note) falls within the reporting period. This includes cases where such an outcome is 
arrived at following the submission of the case to arbitration in instances where the tax treaty 
contains an arbitration provision. 
(ix) No agreement including agreement to disagree (Column 11):  
A MAP case shall be counted as a case closed with no agreement if the date of notification 
from the competent authority to the taxpayer informing the taxpayer of such an outcome (see 
paragraphs 13 and 14 of this not e) falls within the reporting period. “No agreement” includes 
agreement to disagree. 
(x) Any other outcome (Column 12):  
A MAP case shall be counted as a case closed with any other outcome (not falling within any 
of the outcomes described above) if the date of notification from the competent authority to the 
taxpayer informing the taxpayer of such an outcome (see paragraphs 13 and 14 of this note) 
falls within the reporting period.  
For purposes of this statistics reporting framework, if there is more than one outcome relating to a MAP 
request (for example, part of the MAP request is denied MAP access, part of the MAP request is granted 
unilateral relief and part of the MAP request is resolved with the outcome that double taxation is fully 
eliminated), the MAP c ase shall be considered closed based on the date of notification (if there is more 
than one notification, the date of the last notification) from the competent authority and the outcome 
communicated in that notification to the taxpayer.  
(f) Number of pre-2016 cases remaining in MAP inventory on 31 December [YEAR] – see 
Column 13) 
The number of pre-2016 cases remaining in the MAP inventory on 31 December of the year is the number 
of MAP cases in a competent authority’s inventory that are pending resolut ion as of 31 December of that 
year.  
(g) Average time taken (in months) for closing pre-2016 cases during the reporting 
period – see Column 14 
(i) Jurisdictions that are currently reporting MAP Statistics pursuant to the existing reporting 
framework could report in Column 14 the “average cycle time for cases completed, closed or

# Page 71
70        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
withdrawn during the reporting period” as per that reporting framework and should clearly 
indicate this in the “Notes” section. As required under the existing reporting framework, where  
a tax administration does not accept a definition or is unable to report based upon the definition, 
that administration is requested to explain the difference between its reporting and the definition 
of terms provided in the existing reporting framework. Such explanation should be contained 
in the “Notes” section.    
(ii) For all other jurisdictions, they should clearly indicate in the “Notes” section their method of 
computing the average time taken to close a MAP case, including their definition of the “start”  
and “end” date for purposes of computing this average. 
Notes
1 These countries are all the OECD Member States and Argentina, People's Republic of China, Costa Rica, Latvia 
and South Africa. 
2 Available at www.oecd.org/ctp/dispute/38055311.pdf.

# Page 72
       71 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Annex 3.D. –Definition of terms and rules for 
counting MAP cases for purposes of MAP 
Statistics reporting under the reporting template 
in Annex 3.B. 
1. Jurisdictions shall apply the following definitions and counting methods for purposes of their MAP 
Statistics reporting as required under Annex 3.B. of this note:  
(a) MAP case  
A MAP case is a case arising from a request made by a person pursuant to the MAP provisions of a tax 
treaty concerning the taxation of income and capital. Cases within a competent authority’s MAP inventory 
are (i) cases arising from a request submitted directly to that competent authority by a taxpayer; and (ii) 
cases arising from a request submitted by a taxpayer to the competent authority of the treaty partner and 
subsequently presented by that other competent authority to the competent auth ority. These are cases 
arising from requests submitted under a provision based upon Article 25(1) of the OECD Model Tax 
Convention (OECD, 2019 [2]), or under Article 25(3), provided that in the latter case the requests are 
taxpayer-specific and not one for a generic interpretation of the provision of a tax treaty. In addition, cases 
arising under Article 4(2), sub d, or Article 4(3) of the OECD Model Tax Convention  (OECD, 2019[2]) to 
determine residence of a taxpayer also counts as a MAP case. 
A MAP also concerns case arising from a request submitted under the EU Arbitration Convention 1 and 
arising from a complaint on a question in dispute submitted under Article 3(1) of the Council Directive (EU) 
2017/1852 of 10 October 2017 on tax dispute resolution mechanisms in the European Union. 2 
A MAP case however shall not include (i) a request for an Advance Pricing Arrangement (APA) including 
a request to apply the outcome of the APA to previous filed tax years not included within the original scope 
of the APA (i.e. a request for the “roll -back” of the APA); or (ii) a “protective” MAP request. A “protective” 
MAP request is a MAP request submitted by the taxpayer in order to ensure that its request is made within 
the time frame permitted under the relevant tax treaty but the taxpayer has indicated to the competent 
authority or agreed with the competent authority that the request should not be examined until further 
notification is received from the taxpayer to do so. Once such notification (that a taxpayer asks that a 
previously protective MAP request should now be examined) is received by the competent authority, the 
MAP request shall be regarded as “received by a competent authority” in the sense of paragraphs 10 and 
11 of this note.  
(b) Counting of MAP cases 
A MAP request submitted by the taxpayer to one or both Contracting States to a tax treaty shall be counted 
as only one MAP case if  
(iii) the request concerns the taxation of only one taxpayer i n either Contracting State or in each 
Contracting State; or  
(iv) where the issue submitted for MAP discussion relates to transaction(s) of an entity which is not 
liable to tax at the level of the entity itself (for example, a transparent entity or an entity wh ich

# Page 73
72        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
is subject to domestic rules on fiscal unity or similar concepts), the request concerns the 
transactions of only one such entity in either Contracting State or in each Contracting State.  
In these circumstances, a MAP request will be counted as one cas e, irrespective of whether (i) the MAP 
request is submitted by the taxpayer to one or more competent authorities; (ii) the number of issues and 
taxation years involved, so long as these issues and taxation years are covered in the same MAP request; 
and (iii) the MAP request is submitted to the competent authorities under both a tax treaty and the EU 
Arbitration Convention/Dispute Resolution Directive. 
Where in either or both Contracting States, a MAP request concerns the taxation of more than one taxpayer 
or concerns more than one entity, then - 
 if the number of taxpayers or entities concerned in each Contracting State is the same, the number 
of MAP cases shall be equal to this number, or 
 if the number of taxpayers or entities concerned in each Contracting State is different, the number 
of MAP cases shall be equal to the larger number.   
Any subsequent request by the same taxpayer or the same entity with respect to a similar issue but for a  
different taxation year or with respect to the same taxation year for a different issue shall be considered to 
be a new MAP request and the number of MAP cases arising from this new request shall be counted as 
described above.  
(c) Attribution/Allocation MAP Cases – see Table 1 of Part (I) and Part (II) of Annex 3.B. 
An attribution/allocation MAP case is a MAP case where the taxpayer’s MAP request relates to (i) the 
attribution of profits to a permanent establishment (see e.g. Article 7 of the OECD Model T ax Convention 
(OECD, 2019[2])); or (ii) the determination of profits between associated enterprises (see e.g. Article 9 of 
the OECD Model Tax Convention (OECD, 2019[2])), which is also known as a transfer pricing MAP case.  
(d) Other MAP Cases – see Table 2 of Part (I) and Part (II) of Annex 3.B. 
Any MAP case that is not an attribution / allocation MAP case shall be reported as “Others” in Table 2 of 
Part (I) and Part (II) of Annex 3.B.    
2. Jurisdictions shall apply the following definitions and counting methods for purposes of their MAP 
Statistics reporting as required under Part (I) of Annex 3.B. of this note:  
(a) Number of post-2015 cases closed during the reporting period with outcomes as 
stated in Columns 4 to 13 of Table 1 and Table 2 
(i) Cases denied MAP access (Column 4):  
A MAP case shall be counted as a case denied MAP access if the date of notification from the 
competent authority to the taxpayer that its  MAP request is denied access to MAP (see 
paragraphs 13 and 14 of this note) falls within the reporting period. A MAP request is denied 
MAP access if it not an admissible objection or is denied access to MAP for any other reason. 
In instance whereby the taxpayer had sought the decision of an administrative appeal or judicial 
review following the notification from the competent authority that the MAP request is denied 
MAP access, and the decision is such that the case should be granted MAP access, this case 
shall be considered as a new case with the “start” date determined as (i) date of the decision 
of the administrative appeal or judicial review; or (ii) where the taxpayer is required to submit a 
new MAP request, the date as determined based on paragraphs 11 or  12 of this note. 
(ii) Objection is not justified (Column 5):

# Page 74
       73 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
A MAP case shall be counted as a case where the objection is not justified if the date of 
notification from the competent authority to the taxpayer that its objection is not a justified 
objection (see paragraphs 13 and 14 of this note) falls within the reporting period. In instance 
whereby the taxpayer had sought the decision of an administrative appeal or judicial review 
following the notification from the competent authority that the objection  from the taxpayer is 
not justified, and the decision is such that the case is a justified request, this case shall be 
considered as a new case with the “start” date determined as (i) date of the decision of the 
administrative appeal or judicial review; or  (ii) where the taxpayer is required to submit a new 
MAP request, the date as determined based on paragraph 11 or 12 of this note.     
(iii) Withdrawn by taxpayer (Column 6):  
A MAP case shall be counted as a case withdrawn by the taxpayer if the date of receipt  of the 
taxpayer’s notification to the competent authority (see paragraphs 13 and 14 of this note) falls 
within the reporting period. However, if the case is withdrawn by taxpayer following the 
resolution of the issues through remedies provided by the domestic law of a Contracting State, 
that case shall be reflected as a case closed with the outcome “resolved via domestic remedy” 
(see Column 8).   
(iv) Unilateral relief granted (Column 7):  
A MAP case shall be counted as a case closed with unilateral relief gran ted if the date of 
notification from the competent authority to the taxpayer informing the taxpayer of such an 
outcome (see paragraphs 13 and 14 of this note) falls within the reporting period. Such cases 
shall not include cases whereby unilateral relief will be granted by a Contracting State following 
the outcome reached via (i) domestic remedy (such outcome shall be reflected under Column 
8); and (ii) competent authority agreement (such outcome shall be reflected in either Column 
9 or 10).    
(v) Resolved via domestic remedy (Column 8):  
A MAP case shall be counted as a case closed with the outcome “resolved via domestic 
remedy” if the date of that outcome (see paragraphs 13 and 14 of this note) falls within the 
reporting period. If the case is withdrawn by th e taxpayer following an outcome reached via 
domestic remedy which lead to unilateral relief granted by a jurisdiction, that case shall be 
reflected as a case under this column and not as a case withdrawn (see Column 6) or closed 
with unilateral relief granted (see Column 7).   
(vi) Agreement fully eliminating double taxation / fully resolving taxation not in accordance with tax 
treaty (Column 9):  
A MAP case shall be counted as a case closed with agreement fully eliminating double taxation 
/ fully resolving taxa tion not in accordance with tax treaty if the date of notification from the 
competent authority to the taxpayer informing the taxpayer of such an agreement reached via 
competent authority discussion (regardless of whether the taxpayer accepts that outcome) (see 
paragraphs 13 and 14 of this note) falls within the reporting period. This includes cases where 
such an outcome is arrived at following the submission of the case to arbitration in instances 
where the tax treaty contains an arbitration provision.  
(vii) Agreement partially eliminating double taxation / partially resolving taxation not in accordance 
with the tax treaty (Column 10):  
A MAP case shall be counted as a case closed with agreement partially eliminating double 
taxation / partially resolving taxatio n not in accordance with the tax treaty if the date of 
notification from the competent authority to the taxpayer informing the taxpayer of such an 
agreement reached via competent authority discussion (regardless of whether the taxpayer 
accepts that outcome) (see paragraphs 13 and 14 of this note) falls within the reporting period.

# Page 75
74        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
This includes cases where such an outcome is arrived at following the submission of the case 
to arbitration in instances where the tax treaty contains an arbitration provision.  
(viii) Agreement that there is no taxation not in accordance with the tax treaty (Column 11):  
A MAP case shall be counted as a case closed with agreement that there is no taxation not in 
accordance with the tax treaty if the date of notification from the compete nt authority to the 
taxpayer informing the taxpayer of such an agreement reached via competent authority 
discussion (regardless of whether the taxpayer accepts that outcome) (see paragraphs 13 and 
14 of this note) falls within the reporting period. This includes cases where such an outcome is 
arrived at following the submission of the case to arbitration in instances where the tax treaty 
contains an arbitration provision. 
(ix) No agreement including agreement to disagree (Column 12):  
A MAP case shall be counted  as a case closed with no agreement if the date of notification 
from the competent authority to the taxpayer informing the taxpayer of such an outcome (see 
paragraphs 13 and 14 of this note) falls within the reporting period. “No agreement” includes 
agreement to disagree. 
(x) Any other outcome (Column 13):  
A MAP case shall be counted as a case closed with any other outcome (not falling within any 
of the outcomes described above) if the date of notification from the competent authority to the 
taxpayer informing the taxpayer of such an outcome (see paragraphs 13 and 14 of this note) 
falls within the reporting period.  
For purposes of this statistics reporting framework, if there are more than one outcomes relating to a MAP 
request (for example, part of the MAP re quest is denied MAP access, part of the MAP request is granted 
unilateral relief and part of the MAP request is resolved with the outcome that double taxation is fully 
eliminated), the MAP case shall be considered closed based on the date of notification ( if there is more 
than one notification, the date of the last notification) from the competent authority and the outcome 
communicated in that notification to the taxpayer. 
(b) Number of post-2015 cases remaining in MAP inventory on 31 December [YEAR] – 
see Column 14 of Table 1 and Table 2  
The number of post-2015 cases remaining in the MAP inventory on 31 December of the year is the number 
of post-2015 cases in a competent authority’s inventory that are pending resolution as of 31 December of 
that year.  
(c) Number of post-2015 cases remaining in MAP inventory on 31 December [Year] 
falling under the age category “<2 years old” – see Column 2/Row 1 of Table 3 
The number of post -2015 cases in the MAP inventory that are pending resolution as of 31 December of 
the [Year] that were initiated, based on the “Start Date”, on or after 1 January [Year -2]. 
(d) Number of post-2015 cases remaining in MAP inventory on 31 December [Year] 
falling under the age category “>=2 and <4 years old” – see Column 2/Row 2 of Table 3 
The number of post -2015 cases in the MAP inventory that are pending resolution as of 31 December of 
the [Year] that were initiated, based on the “Start Date”, on or after 1 January [Year -4], but before 31 
December [Year-3].

# Page 76
       75 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
(e) Number of post-2015 cases remaining in MAP inventory on 31 December [Year] 
falling under the age category “>=4 and <6 years old” – see Column 2/Row 3 of Table 3 
The number of post -2015 cases in the MAP inventory that are pending resolution as of 31 December of 
the [Year] that were in itiated, based on the “Start Date”, on or after 1 January [Year -6], but before 31 
December [Year-5].   
(f) Number of post-2015 cases remaining in MAP inventory on 31 December [Year] falling 
under the age category “>=6 years old” – see Column 2/Row 4 of Table 3 
The number of post -2015 cases in the MAP inventory that are pending resolution as of 31 December of 
the [Year] that were initiated, based on the “Start Date”, on or before 31 December [Year -7].   
3. Jurisdictions shall apply the following definitions and counting methods for purposes of their MAP 
Statistics reporting as required under Part (II) of Annex 3.B. of this note:  
(a) Average time take from “Start” to “End” of MAP case – see Column 2 of Table 1 and 
Table  2 and Column 1 of Table 3 
The average time taken from “start” to “end” of MAP case shall be calculated by first aggregating the 
number of months from the “start” date (as determined in paragraph 10 or 11 of this note) to the “end” date 
(as determined in paragraph 12 or 13 of this n ote) for each case where the “end” date for the case falls 
within the reporting period.  
The number of months taken for each case shall be computed as the number of days taken from the “start” 
date to the “end” date divided by 365 and multiply by 12 (rounded to two decimal places). The second step 
is to divide this aggregated number of months by the total number of cases where the “end” date for the 
case falls within the reporting period. The result is the average time taken from the “start” to the “end” of a 
MAP case in months (rounded to two decimal places).     
(b) Average time taken from receipt of taxpayer’s MAP request to “Start” – see Column 3 
of Table 1 and Table 2 and Column 2 of Table 3 
The average time taken from the receipt of a taxpayer’s MAP su bmission to the “start” of MAP case (as 
determined in paragraph 10 or 11 of this note) shall be calculated by first aggregating the number of months 
from the date the taxpayer’s MAP submission is received by the competent authority (as referred to in 
paragraph 10 of this note) to the “start” date for each case where the “end date” (as determined in 
paragraph 13 or 14 of this note) falls within the reporting period. 
The number of months taken for each case shall be computed as the number of days taken from t he date 
of receipt of the taxpayer’s MAP submission to the “start” date divided by 365 and multiply by 12 (rounded 
to two decimal places). The second step is to divide this aggregated number of months by the total number 
of all cases where the “end” date f or the case falls within the reporting period. The result is the average 
time taken from a taxpayer’s MAP submission to the “start” of MAP case in months (rounded to two decimal 
places).   
(c) Average time taken from “Start” to Milestone 1 – see Column 4 of Table 1 and Table 2 
and Column 3 of Table 3 
The average time taken from “start” of a MAP case to Milestone 1 shall be calculated by first aggregating 
the number of months it took from the “start” date (as determined in paragraph 11 or 12 of this note) to the 
“date of Milestone 1” (as determined in p aragraph 15 of this note) for each case that has an applicable

# Page 77
76        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
“date of Milestone 1” and where the “end” date (as determined in paragraph 13 or 14 of this note) falls 
within the reporting period.  
The number of months taken for each case that has an applicable “date of Milestone 1” shall be computed 
as the number of days taken from the “start” date to the date of Milestone 1 divided by 365 and multiply by 
12 (rounded to two decimal places). The second step is to divide this aggregated number of months by the 
total number of cases that have an applicable “date of Milestone 1” and where the “end” date for the case 
falls within the reporting period. The result is the average time taken from the “start” of a MAP case to 
Milestone 1 in months (rounded to two decimal places).    
(d) Average time taken from Milestone 1 to “End” – see Column 5 of Table 1 and Table 2 
and Column 4 of Table 3  
The average time taken from Milestone 1 to the “end” of a MAP case shall be calculated by first aggregating 
the number of months  from the date of Milestone 1 (as determined in paragraph 15 of this note) to the 
“end” date (as determined in paragraph 13 or 14 of this note) for each case that has an applicable “date of 
Milestone 1” and where the “end” date (as determined in paragraph 13 or 14 of this note) falls within the 
reporting period.  
The number of months taken for each case that has an applicable “date of Milestone 1” shall be computed 
as the number of days taken from the date of Milestone 1 to the “end” date divided by 365 and multiply by 
12 (rounded to two decimal places). The second step is to divide this aggregated number of months by the 
total number of cases that have an applicable “date of Milestone 1” and where the “end” date for the case 
falls within the reporting perio d. The result is the average time taken from Milestone 1 to the “end” of a 
MAP case in months (rounded to two decimal places). 
(e) Cases closed in the Unilateral stage – see Annex to Table 1 and Annex to Table 2 
MAP cases that are resolved under the outcomes “denied MAP access ”, “objection is not justified ” and 
“unilateral relief granted” as defined in paragraph 2(a) of Annex 3.D. 
(f) Cases closed in the Bilateral stage – see Annex to Table 1 and Annex to Table 2 
MAP cases that are resolved under the outcom es “withdrawn by taxpayer ”, “resolved via domestic 
remedy”, “agreement fully eliminating double taxation eliminated / fully resolving taxation not in accordance 
with tax treaty ”, “agreement partially eliminating double taxation / partially resolving taxati on not in 
accordance with tax treaty ”, “agreement that there is no taxation not in accordance with tax treaty ”, “no 
agreement including agreement to disagree ” and “any other outcome ”. as defined in paragraph 2(a) of 
Annex 3.D. 
(g) Average time taken from “Start” to “End” for Cases closed in the Unilateral stage and 
Cases closed in the Bilateral stage – see Annex to Table 1 and Annex to Table 2 
The average time calculated as under paragraph 3(a) of Annex 3.D for Cases closed in the Unilateral 
Stage or Cases closed in the Bilateral Stage as under paragraphs 3(e) and 3(f) respectively.

# Page 78
       77 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Notes
1 EU Member States are free to note any specificity on MAP requests received by them under the EU Arbitration 
Convention, including providing a breakdown of the MAP Statistics relating to such cases in the Notes section of the 
MAP Statistics Reporting template. 
2 EU Member States are free to note any specificity on MAP requests received by them under Dispute Resolution 
Directive, including providing a breakdown of the MAP Statistics relating to such cases in the Notes section of the MAP 
Statistics Reporting template.

# Page 79
78        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
Introduction 
1. The Report on Action 14: Making Dispute Resolution Mechanisms More Effective (“the 2015 Action 
14 Report”) (OECD, 2015[1]) was approved by the OECD Committee of Fiscal Affairs (“CFA”) in September, 
presented to the OECD Council and endorsed by the G20 Finance Ministers on 8 October 2015. This 
Report contained a commitment by countries engaged in the work to the implementation  of a minimum 
standard to ensure that they resolve treaty-related disputes in a timely, effective and efficient manner and 
to have their compliance with the minimum standard reviewed by their peers – i.e. the other members of 
the Forum on Tax Administration MAP Forum (“the FTA MAP Forum”). 
2. One of the elements of the minimum standard1 requires that jurisdictions’ published MAP guidance 
should identify the specific information and documentation that a taxpayer is required to submit with a 
request for MAP assistance and jurisdictions should not limit access to MAP based on the argument that 
insufficient information was provided if the taxpayer has provided this information. The 2015 Action 14 
Report (OECD, 2015[1]) tasked the FTA MAP Forum to develop guidance on the specific information and 
documentation required to be submitted with a request for MAP assistance. 
Guidance on the specific information and documentation required to be 
submitted with a request for MAP assistance 
3. The Action 14 minimum standard requires that jurisdictions should not deny access to MAP based 
on the argument that insufficient information was provided. To provide certainty and clarity to taxpayers on 
the information and documentation requirement, jurisdictions are to publish clear rules, guidelines and 
procedures on access to and use of the MAP, including the specific information and documentation that 
should be submitted in a taxpayer’s request for MAP assistance. As tasked by the 2015 Action 14 R eport 
(OECD, 2015 [1]), the FTA MAP Forum has developed the following guidance on the information and 
documentation required to be submitted with a request for MAP assistance. 
4. To ensure that a taxpayer’s MAP request is received and will be reviewed by the competent 
authority in a timely manner, a jurisdiction’s MAP guidance should clearly provide information on how a 
taxpayer can make a request for MAP assistance and should include the following:  
(i) Contact information of t he competent authority or the office in charge of MAP cases – to 
ensure that MAP requests are received by the competent authority in a timely manner, jurisdictions 
should provide information on the name and the designation of the person or the office to which 
the MAP request should be submitted, including the specific mailing address or email address to 
which a MAP request should be sent. 
4 Guidance on Specific Information and Documentation Required 
to be Submitted with a Request for MAP Assistance

# Page 80
       79 
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
(ii) The manner and form in which the taxpayer should submit its MAP request – MAP guidance 
should clearly state any requir ements with respect to the format of a request, including whether 
paper or electronic forms should be used and the required language of the request and any 
accompanying documentation. In addition, MAP guidance should include any requirements relating 
to th e timing of the submission of a MAP request (other than the timeframe stipulated in the 
applicable MAP provision), for example, a requirement that if the taxpayer is intending to submit 
the same MAP request to another competent authority, then the two requests should be submitted 
at the same time. MAP guidance should also require a taxpayer to clearly indicate in its MAP 
request if its request is a “protective” MAP request2. 
5. To facilitate the review of a MAP request, a jurisdiction’s MAP guidance should cle arly list the 
information and documentation that should be submitted with a taxpayer’s request for MAP assistance. 
The information and documentation to be included in the taxpayer’s MAP request could include, for 
example, the following: 
(i) Identity of the taxpayer(s) covered in the MAP request – the identity of the taxpayer(s) covered 
in a MAP request must be sufficiently specific to allow the competent authority to identify and 
contact the taxpayer(s) involved. The information provided should include the name , address, 
taxpayer identification number or birth date, contact details and the relationship between the 
taxpayers covered in the MAP request (where applicable). 
(ii) The basis for the request  – the MAP request should state the specific tax treaty including th e 
provision(s) of the specific article(s) which the taxpayer considers is not being correctly applied by 
either one or both Contracting Party (and to indicate which Party and the contact details of the 
relevant person(s) in that Party). 
(iii) Facts of the case  – the MAP request should contain all the relevant facts of the case including 
any documentation to support these facts, the taxation years or period involved and the amounts 
involved (in both the local currency and foreign currency). 
(iv) Analysis of the issue(s ) requested to be resolved via MAP  – the taxpayer should provide an 
analysis of the issue(s) involved, including its interpretation of the application of the specific treaty 
provision(s), to support its basis for making a claim that the provision of the sp ecific tax treaty is 
not correctly applied by either one or both Contracting Party. The taxpayer should support its 
analysis with relevant documentation (for example, documentation required under transfer pricing 
legislative or published guidance, copies o f tax assessments, audits conducted by the tax 
authorities leading to the incorrectly application of the tax treaty provision). 
(v) Whether the MAP request was also submitted to the competent authority of the other 
Contracting Party – If so, the MAP request should make this clear, together with the date of such 
submission, the name and the designation of the person or the office to which the MAP request 
was submitted. A copy of that submission (including all documentations filed with that submission) 
should also be provided unless the content of both MAP submissions are exactly the same.  
(vi) Whether the MAP request was also submitted to another authority under another Instrument 
that provides for a mechanism to resolve treaty -related disputes – If yes, the MAP reque st 
should clearly state so and the date of such submission, the name and the designation of the 
person or the office to which the MAP request was submitted, should be provided. A copy of that 
submission (including all documentations filed with that submission) should also be provided unless 
the content of both MAP submissions are exactly the same. 
(vii) Whether the issue(s) involved were previously dealt with  – the request should state whether 
the issue(s) presented in the MAP request has been previously dealt wi th, for example, in an 
advance ruling, advance pricing arrangement, settlement agreement or by any tax tribunal or court. 
If yes, a copy of these rulings, agreements or decisions should be provided.

# Page 81
80        
BEPS ACTION 14 ON MORE EFFECTIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS – PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS © OECD 2023 
  
(viii) A statement confirming that all information and documenta tion provided in the MAP 
request is accurate and that the taxpayer will assist the competent authority in its resolution 
of the issue(s) presented in the MAP request by furnishing any other information or 
documentation required by the competent authority in a timely manner – the request for any 
other information or documentation should be well -targeted and responses to the request should 
be complete and be submitted within the time stipulated in the request for such information or 
documentation. 
Reference 
 
OECD (2015), Making Dispute Resolution Mechanisms More Effective, Action 14 - 2015 Final 
Report, OECD/G20 Base Erosion and Profit Shifting Project, OECD Publishing, Paris, 
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264241633-en. 
[1] 
 
Notes 
1 See minimum standard 3.2 in the 2015 Action 14 Report and elements B.6. and B.8. of the Terms of Reference to 
monitor and review the implementation of the BEPS Action 14 minimum standard to make dispute resolution 
mechanisms more effective (“Terms of Reference”). 
2 A “protective” MAP request is understood as a MAP request submitted by the taxpayer to ensure that its request is 
made within the time frame provided under the tax treaty but the taxpayer has indicated at the point of making the 
request or subsequently to the competent authority that the request need not be examined until further notification 
from the taxpayer to do so.

# Page 82
BEPS Action 14 on More Effective 
Dispute Resolution Mechanisms 
PEER REVIEW DOCUMENTS
